Good luck on your new start!
My teacher is going to move to change his job.
He is a so nice guy and taught me English very kindly and was willing to accept my getting off the track.
And he took in my favorite subject like soccer.
Actually, who let me know about Lang-8 was him.
He is also good at Japanese and studies' Kanji'.
His Kanji's ability is much better than me.
We've known each other for only half a year, but his lesson was a lot of fun.
I'm going to miss him but I really wish him the best of luck with his new life.
I'm looking forward to seeing him again through here.
Good words
I heard a sentence last night when I watched TV.
It reminds and inspires me a lot.
Your life is like when you walk.
When you go downhill, you have to stick out your chest or you will fell down.
When you go uphill, you hvae to bend your back.
It is like when you are confronted with frustration, you have to keep your confidence.
When you are go smoothly, you have to be more modest.
It is really good for me.
Arrangements
It's summer.
The session is passed, and I work as apprentice at the souvenir shop.
When I was at school, we painted a lot of wooden handicrafts like small plates and cases.
The making souvenir is a hard and interesting work.
On the one hand you need to be attentive and neat, but on the other hand you should set all your imagination and inspiration in motion.
Maybe, in this August my mom and I will visit Norway, Sweden and Finland.
I like Finland.
When my family used to go there very frequently (about 3 or 4 times a month), I had a nice time.
I will never forget my first time at customs.
I suppose, I was 7 (nice age, you don't need to think about serious things and can do what you want).
We drove at our heavy truck to border, there was a long queue, we were waiting.
Well, finally, my mother took me to the customs window, she gave a passport to man...
and when we were going to sit in a truck, frightened man suddenly said `` lapsi! ``.
Mom stared at him and raised me up to show him: D That's my first memory about this country.
The second memory is the toys, which I was given near the border.
That's two balls: one with a cat inside, other with dog.
You know, you can take them at slot machine.
So that's the second.
The third memory is the house we lived.
It was situated near Helsinki, big and light house with the small lake behind it (it was winter, so it was frozen).
The rooms were big enough, but not so big.
There were few furnitures.
And one of this I liked the most is a big white fridge.
Don't know why.
I liked the winter Finland.
And I hope I like the summer Finland.
By the way, today I went to guitar teacher, and the only thing he said after `` Show me what you can! `` was `` What do you want?
You play really well, you level skills are higher than just amateur.
Just improvise already! `` To tell the truth, I myself didn't expect what I CAN play like that I did.
And why I didn't play that good at the audition?...
Well, I just proud of myself, yep.
:)
And, by the way, `` white nights `` have already come.
And now they disturb me.
If only I had black dense curtains.
Whitney Houston Failed
A couple of weeks ago, I heard a new Whitney Houston's tune on my car radio.
It sounded not bad.
I had been wondering what she was doing.
And finally, she released a new song!
She came back!
Today, I read an article on the net about her comeback performance in New York's Central Park.
It said that was disappointing.
Her voice was hoarse and cracked.
Oh, My God!
What a shock!
Her recent picture was not like her before.
Old and not beautiful.....
What happened to her?
I know her tumultuous marriage with Bobby Brown and an arduous battle with drug addiction.
Still she hasn't recovered from them?
She had a incredible beautiful high voice.
She was decent, not like Mariah Carey.
However, she is already 46!
More disappointing thing to me is she said the reason of her bad voice was because she talked with Oprah Winfrey too much on her show.
That might be one of the reasons, however, it sounds like just an excuse.
I believe she can sing.
I hope she would come back to the scene as a diva again, even not like her heyday.
First entry
I think this web site is a cool idea.
People help each other learning their languages.
Let me write something and see if anyone can review it and give me some advice.
I just installed Fallout 3 and played a bit last night.
I would say after 10 years of waiting, it has not failed its title, at least from my first impression.
A lot of good features are inherited from old Fallout series, like the SPECIAL system, always having good, bad, neutral and (my favorite) sarcasm options when talking with NPCs.
I'm not sure about keeping the action points feature though.
Anyway, I think I'll spent quite some playing it in the next few weeks.
It's too hot.
It's too hot in Japan.
On the way I had a headache.
It's not a joke.
If my sentences aren't practical correct them.
A nice surpise
This morning I found out that one of my favourite band released his new album.
I already forgot about Rise Against an it is a great surprise for me, because I didn't return to them for 2 years.
I hope this band didn't become worse yet like many others big ones and I'll enjoy listening it.
Well, there remains to get it and check it out.
My mum is a great cook!
Hi everyone,
I just realised I am so lucky!!!
Why?
It's because my mum is probably the best cook I have met in my life.
Cooking is not her profession, she is a housewife.
I have ate at hotels and expensive meals but they are nothing like what she cooks.
A friend once told me that the reason why I love her cooking is because she's my mum but that is not the reason.
Being a housewife is really tough.
I rather be working outside than be a housewife.
So I must appreciate my mum and help her ^ ^
no title, haha
I don't really like cockroaches...
I haven't seen cockroaches since I came here.
I think it's about for one and half year.
I tried to fight against him, but he didn't show up.
I should have exploded whole this building so that I can make them destroy~!!!
Oh, I remembered.
I had to write about counseling.
I'm gon na do it next time!
bye!
Nice to meet you.
This is my first time to write diary on the internet.
I hope someone see my diary and correct it.
I watched DVD `` Grey's anatomy `` today.
Actually I keep watching it these days.
I'm so into it.
I watched season 2 today.
So there are a lot to see.
I don't know medical word in English very much.
So I have to check dictionary all the time.
But I can study English through this.
And I think it's fun, right?
Thank you for reading this.
Fruit
I ate a Chinese citron now.
I love citrus fruits.
And I'm eating a banana every day for my health.
The banana is gather in my stomach and gives me energy.
My dog!
I have to make a newspaper in English as my summer vacation homework and I decided to introduce about my dog on the news paper.
So, please somebody correct my English!
I will introduce about my dog, Tiara.
She is cheerful and plump pretty dog, perhaps she is the cutest dog in the world.
She's a golden retriever and she's 8 years old.
Her fur is beautiful amber and soft.
She is little stupid, but has perceptive insights about food because she is always famished ^ ^ She loves food!
When she has had her food, she always prances around the living room merrily.
And she loves basking too.
She usually lays down near the big window and basks in the morning sun.
When she is basking she looks very comfortable.
RAIN
It is raining in Tokyo.
It has not been rainy for a week,
it makes me happy.
Usually, rain makes me unhappy,
however, I hoped rain because it is too hot.
Anyway, today will be good day.
thank you for reading.
A New Hair Style of the Wang
I saw a news on Yahoo yesterday.
It reported that Chien-Ming Wang cut his hair and had a new hair style.
Here is the link.
URL
My English translation of the title is `` Wang changed a new hair style, but Jeter sucks it `` As long as you are a Chinese, nine out of ten you will think that Wang matched the new style very much, and that his new style is very handsome.
However, the news mentioned that Derek Jeter think his hair was really a damn.
The different values about handsome among cultures are very interesting.
I have seen an article on TIME.
It talked about there is a big difference about different values of a handsome man between Western countries and Eastern countries.
It mentioned many examples of Japanese men, Korean men and Hong Kong men.
They paid much attemtion to their faces and also spent lots of money to shop.
But in Western countries, the standard of a handsome man depends not on their faces, but on their masculine symbols, say, muscle and behavior.
I started to notice the ways of foreign clothing and hair styles these past days by watching TV programs, such as Friends, Srcubs and etc.
I found out that the clothing and the hair styles was very different.
About clothing, the western men dressed mostly very simple, and about hair, most of them don't have a fringe at all and their backhair were short that no hair cover necks.
If they had a long hair, it will be really long and thick.
By contrast, men in eastern countries most dress up.
Except a shirt and a jean, we usually wear an accessory.
As to hair, men usually have a median hair, neither very short or long.
If we want to cut a very short hair, we must leave some hair on the back of neck in order to avoid looking like a nerd.
If we want to have a long hair style, mostly it will be light and especailly long on a fringe or backhair.
Oh my god.
I make a long entry again.
It almost cost a whole morning.
I have to watch the NBA final game 3.
Hope you will not feel bored about this diary and help me for correcting it.
I like you give me any commets and opinoins too.
I really like to discuss.
My son have diarrhe
When I came back home from working today.
My son have diarrea.
It was like a warter and son's hip became red.
Tomorrow I will go to hometown.
We are ready to go out.
But we cancei that.
What a pity!
But a no way.
Listening to music
I am listening to music with the commuter train.
Today, I listen the music, it looks like in the cafe.
For example, `` Lovi' n you. ``
I want to speak English.
So, I listen the English song.
Come fast next season!
I don ` t like winter.
It is very cold.
I like warm season.
so I like spring.
Spring is very exciting season.
New life, New meets (friends), New meets (oneself)
Japanese school, work starts spring.
I hope to get any quarifications in english.
I hope to get my new promotions.
But that isn ` t postopned.
Everyday starts new thinngs to try.
Self-introduction
Hello everyone!!
I'm Gen-Mai.
Gen-Mai means unpolished rice in Japanese.
I'm called Gen-Mai by my friends sometimes.
... No, extremely sometimes.
Since today, I'm going to try write a diary!!
Today is nothing specal to write!!
See you tomorrow!!
Bye!
Hello!
until yesterday I was very busy so I didn't watch dvds.
I hooked on the American dvds.
The title is `` closer ``.
Before that I hooked on `` Alias ``.
Jennifer Garner is attractive women so when I watched making scene, I felt drawn toward her.
I think Amercan drama is a good study but this drama is very difficult.
Doing for relaxation
I got a foot masssage today.
It's kind of Tai-wan stayle massage.
I loved the massage shop where I went because the staff of the shop explains what is wrong in my body.
They said I'm cold-natured and have poor blood flow.
In addition, the staff said correctly that I had problems with my lower back and my neck.
I was surprized at finding my health condition from my foot.
After that, I went to a fittness club which has bedrock bathing.
I feel relax to take a bedrock bath ^ 
... but now I'm very sleepy... zzz
cow tongue
I'm went to Sendai to business trip today.
The special product in Sendai is a cow tongue.
I bought it and ate at home.
It was very delicious.
I want to eat its cow tongue again.
wake up!
I was woken up by my daughter today.
The daughter was woken up by my wife.
Who woke her up?
The wife was woken up by my stertor.
hahaha.
BBQ
Tomorrow I'm going for BBQ (I'm sure this expression is wrong, but I don't know how to say it ^ ^ ;) in the river.
BUT!
Where to do it and when we should leave is not decided yet!
( I know that a long subject is not good in English, but how can I rewrite this?)
Can you believe it??
This time we leave everything to my friend, but I'm kinda person who don't feel at ease unless everything is perfect.
So, even now I feel nervous, wondering if It' really going to be held.
Am I busy?
I am a person who enjoys her own leisure time.
And I want to live my life on my own pace.
Sleeping as long as I want everyday.
But I found it hard to achieve recently.
Because when I finished my classes, homeworks or jobs etc...
It's nearly 10 pm when I back home.
And after I take a bath, brush my teeth, chat with my friends etc...
It's nearlly 12 pm.
Afterall, I want to at least healthly sleep before 12 pm.
QQ
tears.....
These days I suffered many unhappy things.
Maybe those matters were not so bad as the facts, but I really couln't handle them while they occured together....
English is one of my biggest problems.
I don't know how to master this language well...
Though I spend most of my time and energy in learning English, it seems that I hardly make any improvement has become a truth...
I don't know why I have to learn English so hard..!!!
Today,..
I went to take the business English correspondence class as usual.. but this time...
our teacher said a sentence to me, which made me heart broken..
I had never knew my English was poor until the teacher told me that my English was sound illogically....
I didn't know how I felt at that moment..
but I did know my eyes were wet..
and the tears nearly fell from my face..
Summer holida
I had long breaktime.
I should to study again.
It's so cute.
Hello everyone.
I'm got up at thirty past 6am in Japan.
I found a very cute movie.
URL
It's so cute!
One
Hello! Nice to meet you! My name is Ailsa.
I joke name.
I am twenty-three years old.
I hope you make many friends of the lang-8.
thank you everyone!
Electioneering
Election will be done Augst 30.
Mayer is cheering Hamada minister of defence.
Mr.
Hamada birong to Liberal Democratic Party.
This time they may be lost adoministration.
Democratic Party has more many supporters than them.
Mayer is busy with election campaign and his own work.
I'm going to do everyting for help him as his secretary.
Today
I went to Kanazawa university festival with my American friend.
It was fun.
I made good friend with Vietnamese.
We ate Ikayaki and Omurice there.
They were good.
After that we wemt for a drive to enjoy the autumn colors.
we enjoyed well.
And we had a dinner with my another friends.
We ate pizza and pasta.
We talked with each other and enjoyed our meals.
It's a amazing day today.
A bear at the washbowl
There is a bear at the washbowl in my house.
Of course, it isn't a real bear.
It is made of spnge:) It is cute.
It waits at all times to clean the washbowl.
Yesterday, I learned that John Galliano was tried when I watched CNN news.
I was so surprised and sad.
I thought he was a wonderful designer, but he got into trouble.
I'm going to study abroad in America.
But I have two worries.
One of them is that my English is very clumsy yet.
Anyway, I'm studying English at the TOEFL Institute these days.
The Berklee don't requires a TOEFL score.
I'm just attending the Institute to improve my English because I'll have to take many classes in English.
Many assignments are given to me everyday.
Self-Introduction
Hello!
I live in Okinawa, the southwestern part of Japan.
I work for the Japan air self defense force.
I'm laerning English, but it's really difficult for me!
I want to get friends here and have my compositions corrected.
Thank you.
Irregular heartbeat
Several days ago, I got an irregular heartbeat for the first time in my life!
It was like this ; I suddenly started to feel a kind of discomfort around my heart.
Then I checked my pulse and found that there was a missing beat at intervals.
I was very scary because I had been very healthy so far.
I thought, `` It's so terrible!
I'm still in the 20's.
Do I have to get along with it all my life? `
Then I went to the hospital and took an ECG.
The doctor told me that I did have a irregular pulse ossacionally but it was not a fatal one.
He added that it could get worse due to stress and fatigue, and he just advised me to take an enough rest.
I was releaved to hear the doctor's diagnosis but I'm still worried.
I didn't know that stress could induce an irregular heartbeat of a healthy young lady like me!
As the old saying goes, all illness comes from the mind.
How to write a reseach proposal?
I think that may be a common question for those students want to pursue a higher education.
We seldom research something.
What Chinese universities offer for their students are mostly composed by coursework base curriculum.
The show of our lives must go on, so does the application.
I've sum up some points which I think important and useful.
1.
You can count on google as your best friend, adviser and an almost infinite resources of academic papers.
Many of them you can download pdf copy, or If you can't download paper from the links scholar. google. com offer you, go directly to the author's website, many authors enjoy their paper to be seemed and cited by potential readers.
2.
A good review is the best start point.
And then you can trace the author, or the paper cited to do a more in depth research in your interested area.
3.
The balance of width and depth of your reading is essential.
Both way have its merits and disadvantages.
4.
Inovative and original idea is good, but if you can not find them, you should know that most of research work is just refinement of other's work.
A practical plan and reasonable analysis is also worth a lot.
Vessel
I'll spend the next weeks on board of the `` Justo Sierra `` vessel making some geophysical research and learning.
I'm sure it's going to be a terrific experience.
I need to study!
Please correct my English sentences! (20090108)
The thing that I want to make in January 2009 is to invest more effort in studying English and keep on writing sentences in English every day here, Lang-8!
Thanks a lot!
USJ
I went to USJ yesterday with my friend.
It was so cold that I could not stop shivering.
However there were not so many people there, so we do not need to wait our turn outside.
My friend worked part-time at USJ.
It looked like she was really having a great time!
So I wanted to work part-time at USJ, too.
I will go to Tokyo Disney Land in February.
I am really looking forward to it:)
It will be very cold.
So I must ptotect myself against the coldX (
I want to go to Walt Disney World someday!!!
Manga in English
Diagnosed of being easily impresse
Today, I was reviewing my previous entries and my comments.
I realized that I'm that kind of people who are easily impressed.
I find lots of things fascinating.
I'm moved by very simple things and other people might not even have a second look at.
For instance, I started watching Indian movies about a month ago.
I have some friends who are crazy about this genre.
I, on the other hand, didn't have much time to watch any.
When I had the time, I brought about six Indian movies to watch.
The first movie I watched, made me cry for two hours like a five year old who lost her doll.
You think the second one was different?
Not at all.
The six movies have the same basic idea.
Actually all the Indian movies have the same basic idea.
However, I continued crying during the rest five and each one of them impressed me even more.
Indian movies are like clay that you can shape into many different shapes but they're all still made of clay.
The shape is what impresses me, and not the clay itself.
This concept might be a bit ambiguous for those who haven't been in such situation.
So, how bad is it?
Still...
I still have got a cold.
I took a medicine, so I feel better for now.
sorry, that's all for today.
Have a nice day:)
`` 450th times `
This is my 450th times diary.
I started keeping a diary around the 2008.
Thanks to the people all over the world, I'm having a fun time and solid time.
Changing the subject, I got my call from my friend yesterday.
She said `` I want to cancel the New York trip.
I recently out of shape. `` I was somewhat puzzied for an answer.
Hi!
Hello! My name is Ken.
I'm study of English was started.
However, it is terrible and difficult.
I want to study more and to make a lot of friends.
The first Man in Rome
I am going to talk about the historical novel called `` The First Man in Rome `` by Colleen McCullough, who is a british woman writter.
The novel is about a important roman politican called Caius Marius.
He is de main character, although appearing others like Cornelius Silla, Metelus, and the Caesar's grandfather.
Marius didn't come from a important family, but he became in consul because he was a clever and popular general at roman army.
So, after he was chose consul by the romans, he went to Afrika where he fought againt Yugurta who was king of Numidia.
Marius had to fright other tribes at north of Italy, until in 100 B.
C.
he must leave the power because he got sick.
hi
I went to school.
By the way, Do you like study?
I play basketball after school.
I think basketball play everyone.
Because one for all all for one.
super-flu
I've just received a international call by my cellphone.
I was wondering if that was from my friend's call.
But that's from Korea's quarantine depot,
they're conducting follow-up of super-flu for entry to Korea recently.
They asked me if we have fever and cold symptoms.
We don't have this symptoms now.
If that helps, this picture is the information what gave us from Japan's quarantine depot when we returned Japan.
D:
hey hey you you!!
lets hang out with me in tokyo~ haha~ x
im soo free till next month.
kinda lucky but not for me. being bored sucks.
I don like it.
An abstract concept of hapiness
Although most people think about what happiness is like, most people never doubt there are happiness somewhere in human's life.
A famous man, I heard, said in the past that the worst things for you is to be born in the world.
According to this, human's life can be said to be leisure time to the end.
Do you think there are like happiness in reality??
Please correct these sentences!
Sorry for a little academic.
I am just writing about the parents' attitude when their children complain about chronic abdominal pain.
Is the below one OK?
-------
Trained parents who show distraction produces fewer childrens' chronic functional abdominal symptoms than parents who show attention.
Let me introduce myself
Hello everyone,
I'm Makitys.
This is my nickname.
I was born and grew up in Tokyo.
I studied applied physics and electronics at a university in Tokyo.
I took a bachelor's degree of these subjects at the university.
After graduated from the university, I got a job as an engineer.
I changed jobs a few times but the same type of job as an engineer.
I still work for an electronics maker in Japan as an engineer.
I'm a single woman and live by myself.
My parents and a brother and a sister live in Tokyo.
I moved to Fukuoka from Yokohama for business this January.
Fukuoka is located the northern part of Kyushu.
Kyushe is a part of the Japanese Archipelago.
( see the map I've attached)
Fukuoka city is the biggest city in Kyushu.
Comparing with Tokyo, Fukuoka is compact but it is a very comfortable city.
Commodity prices here are lower than those in Tokyo and Fukuoka Airport is very near central Fukuoka.
You know, Narita Airport is far from central Tokyo.
It takes one hour from the airport to central Tokyo even if you take an expensive superexpress.
Moreover Tokyo is a very crowded city.
One thing I unsatisfy to live here is that I'm separated from my family.
It takes much money to go see my parents from here.
I miss my family and relatives who live in Tokyo.
If you come to Fukuoka, please let me know!
English lesson for Hallowee
I'm an elementary school teacher as you might know.
Yesterday, I made an English lesson with ALT, which is an acronym for Assistant Language Teacher.
The lesson's topic was Halloween.
The student need to answer some questions about Halloween I've prepared by playing Bingo.
After the class, I asked the students to answer a questionnaire.
I was very glad to find they liked the lesson.
[ Diary ] 14 / 8 / 10 of Event
It is cloudy or rainy recently.
Although my school was no lecture, I got up early in the morning today.
I ate a piece of toast putting butter and cinnamon sugar and went to a coin laundry near my house to wash my clothes because I do not have clothes washer in my house.
It cost six dollars to washing and cost six dollars to the dryer.
When I washing ended, it was evening.
I went to the cake shop in the city my friend introduced to me as nice taste and famous.
The shop of inner decorating was green.
After came back home, I cooked dinner, and the dinner was prawn & avocado salad, roast chicken and OTAMA SAN GOHAN.
First, cut lettuce, cut coarsely a tomato and then stair-fly some prawns.
Stair-fry it until it became golden brown.
The roast chicken only heated up with oven.
The OTAMA SAN GOHAN is Japaneseonly traditional food.
It only sprinkles the raw egg and a pinch of the soy source on warm rice.
They were easy cooking but they tasted nice!!
After that I watched two movie, animation of genius boy and 007, on TV for approximately four hour.
So I felt tired my eyes and butt.
Thank you (The letter to my daughter's English teacher)
My 4-years-old daughter goes to an English lesson since when we decided to move to Singapore for 3 months.
She is interested in speaking English and writing alphabets now thanks to the teacher.
This is the letter below.
I appreciate to teach English to my daughter.
She was always looking forward to your lesson.
Your lessons were energetic and so much fun.
When we decided her to go to a international school that only few Japanese go to, we noticed she had to start to study English immediately because she couldn't speak English at all.
I was looking for English class around here.
At first we found a flyer at the play room.
We thought just taking a trial lesson, but she told me that I want to go to the lesson again.
I am very surprised to her progress.
Now she is very interested in speaking English, writing alphabets and sings WHAT' S YOUR NAME?
song everyday.
Her progress owe to you.
What your children speaking only English are same class is also good for her.
It will be base after she will go to new school.
If I didn't need to take care of my kids, I wanted to have your lessons!
When you come to Singapore, please contact us.
It is very easy to come with kids because it is clean, safe, just a 1-hour time difference and available Haneda airport.
We are looking forward to seeing you and your children someday somewhere.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for all the staff and class mates.
Take care.
Best regard.
Basaballgame
Hello.
Yesterday I went to the stadium to see the baseball game.
After classes of university, I went back home directly, prepared packages and searched what time I should leave home and which trains I should take.
I went there with my friends.
The team I cheer is located in second position.
And if the team win 8 games, the team will get first position.
But remainder of its games is 9 games.
Therefore it is so difficult for it to get first position.
The game began.
The starting pithier was not good, so that the opposition could get 3 points easily.
But in this attack they couldn't get any points.
So in this game we lost.
We cheered very hard, but the miracle was never happened.
So today I have a sore throat.
That's about it for today.
See you again / /
My hobbies
I have some hobbies.
Those are playing sports, reading a book, lithening to music, taking a walk and so on.
My favorit hobby is talking with my friends, because I think it is the best time to be with my friends.
I gained about 10 kilograms after I quitted my clubs in high school.
That's why I have to lose my weight!!!
So, I jog and exercise always.
I wanna have the six-pack!! hah
Holidays
This weekend three holidays in Japan.
Saturday, Sunday and Monday close.
Monday is Equinox's da
It will gradually be warm.
Japanese are waiting cherry blossoms in this season.
What might be some of the causes of over-weight or obesity in the US?
Last English lesson, we discussed it.
There are some of causes, such as high calorie food, laziness...
In Japan, there are a lot of fast food restaurants around town. convenience store too. we can easily get food. same circumstance in the U.
S. but most Japanese people are not obese.
A teacher asked it `` why ``.
that is probably a result of lack of self control to eating.
I go to study English on Sundays.
Sometimes I can't explain what I thought and I can't come up with good idea thinking in English.
But, the moment I just touched the door knob at my home, I got my answer.
`` School lunch `` and `` Education of dietary `` could be good effect of self control to eating.
All of public primary school provide lunch for students.
That was wonderful system.
The nutritionist organized calorie control, a variety of menu every day, providing best season's food, traditional meal.
Through school lunch, students learn many kind of taste, knowledge of food and Japanese culture for six years at least.
once every three time a day though, It makes good habit and health.
How about my opinion?
a lot of workload
2010. 3. 26
Today My worklord were so many.
Yesterday was also.
But Next week I will go on a business trips.
I had to prepare for them.
Tomorrow I have a little work.
I will go library and cafe to study electronics after that.
Today's music.
Claud Nugaro sings `` La Javanaise ``.
Wonderful voices.
Thanks for reading.
Play
I went to a play.
My friend starred on the play.
I and she became friend when we were junior high school student.
We friendships for more than 10 years.
But I didn't know she is an actress.
I saw her play first time today.
I was moved.
I think I hope to continue a play for her.
Holiday is over.
Today is Japanese National holiday.
So I took three-day weekend.
But Because of being rainy yesterday to today, I and my family couldn't enjoy.
Children were playing games very longtime.
I can't help it.
reading diary
Tonight I read and corrected many diaries.
I might be make a mistake when corrected English.
But I think it's good way to learn from my mistake.
Thai
I tried to correct Thai language for who wrote in Thai.
It's also fun to read Thai writting from a non native speaker.
English
I started to practice my English since I've started my journey aboard.
And realized how language could help you know more people.
Reading English language make me feel very happy.
Then when I went to Japan.
My English could not help me
anymore.
I am impressed my life at there very much.
I only told them in English language.
It would be good if I could spea
.
Japanese.
I could not writting Japanese or understand.
Japanese culture is interesting but Japanese people is quiet,
It's difficult to know what are in their mind.
So I started to reading japanese book which translate to Thai language.
I don't want to take Japanese class.
It's might be boring.
So decide to learn by nature... viewing Japanese anime
and remember Kanji which I like ^ _ 
.
I learn a lot from Japanese food...
Japanese food is available every corner in Thailand.
Coincidence
I think a birds of a feather flock together.
The otehr day I met one of my classmate in high school at a station for the first time in fifteen years.
She is a teacher as well.
I'm English teacher.
She is teacher for walking and posture.
What a coincidence.
We had small talk (short talk?) there, and left.
When I started to walk, I thought I want to talk with her more!
So I shouted her name and stopped her.
We exchange our contact info and decided to meet again very soon.
We met two weeks ago, I felt strange, because we didn't meet each other for many years, but we have many things to tell each other.
Plenty of things to talk, but not enough time.
We shouldn't sort people into level, but I believe we are living in same level (same category, same world).
That's why we could meet again!
Spain!
I had to endure a long long flight to get to Spain.
Changing planes, it took nearly 15 hours in total from Nagoya to Barcelona.
Each seat has a small TV screen, with which we can see movies, listen to music, play games and you name it.
I don't like watching a close screen so I killed time reading something.
It was really wearing.
I will write details about my trip tomorrow.
The catcher in the rye
Today, I read `` The catcher in the rye `` as a summer homework.
To say the truth, I could not understand why this book is thought a masterpiece.
Because I didn't feel bored when I was reading it, but I was not so excited or moved.
But I like the characters in the book, because they are very characteristic.
If you had read the book, please tell me which part you think interesting.
21. 12. 2012 * * * I'm university student.
Hi, I've started lang-8.
I learn to speak English and find friends here.
Whe don't you become friends?
I've lived in london since 2005-2008.
but I cant speak English... (; _ ;)
so please teach me English!!
Now, I'm doing job hunting.
concert tickets
I called for refund the Park Yong-ha concert tickets.
I heard send money by registered mail by August 13th.
Culture of shame
Foreign medias admire that Japanese people are behaving calmly, organised and in a supporting.
But it's common for we Japanese.
We think that having trouble others is very bad thing and shameful.
Every parent want their children not to have trouble others.
Japanese have grown rice which need to help each other in the community the past.
So getting along with people in the community is very important.
When parents scold ill-mannered children they use the same phrase `` I'm too ashamed to face people. `` Though this phrase is not so common to young parents, this ethics is in Japanese gene.
Hello World
Hi everyone!
This is my first post here.
I'd be glad if you correct my mistakes.
By the way, it's Christmas morning.
I say Merry Christmas to you all.
Thanks a lol.
Day 74: I lied today.
I didn't know why I lie but at that time I was blank I = out.
It was a job I seeked from the news paper.
Although I know a private school student like me in Singapore is sticktly prohibit to go to have a job.
I am still go to the place and try my luck.
When the auntie ask me what kind of pass I am holding.
I felt totally nervous and words came out from my mouth: I was a student and holding a student pass.
Many of my friends went to work.
She has no doubt at me and told me to go tomorrow to meet the other people (maybe is the HR staff)
I was going to afraid what am I gon na do tomorrow..
Having a job here is good.
But for me I am more focus on learning the experience through working and communicating with others.
By the way, the job is really a short-term job (seller), which is only last for two weeks.
And I am having my long holidays here.
Twilight
Today I saw a movie-Twilight.
I like this movie very much!
I've seen a lot of movies and cartoons about vampires.
But some of them make me feel disgusting.
There are always so much blood, people are so thirsty.
But Twilight is different.
Edward was cute, he cared about Bella.
And Bella was a strong girl.
She wasn't afraid of Edward.
Sometimes I think being a vampire is good.
They don't need to sleep, they run fast, they are sensitive.
But they can't eat food!
Aha, so I can't be a vampire, I like food!
We are the champions in Asia!
Yesterday, Japan national soccer team played against Australia.
The game was the final of Asia Cup in 2011.
Five days ago, Japan team played 120 minutes, including extra times, against South Korea, furthermore, the average of height of Australia team is taller than Japan.
So I thought most of the Japan members are tired and the game is very hard for Japan team.
As I thought, the game was very hard for Japan.
The game was into extra time two times in a row from semi-final game for Japan.
However, at 110 minute, Lee, who came off the bench, got the goal!
He became `` the Cinderella boy ``, or the hero, overnight.
I'm very glad to win Japan team!
Love Karaoke
I like very much.
Today, I went to a karaoke box with my son and naighbors.
My favorite karaoke songs are Seiko Matsuda's.
I had a relaxed time.
Today I might fall asleep soon.
Good Night!
GUITAR
Maybe I got a guitar to my father long ago.
I mean...
maybe he's still its owner.
I don't know but I often use it more than him...
so...
Anyway, I practice `` change the world ``.
Do my best!
it is rainning today~
it is the season of cherry trees in japan now.
all most japanese people have loved them for a long time.
there are some reason why we love it.
the time from bloom to falling is very early.
it is like human life.
and we can enjoy drinking ^ ^
it is a lot of fun to drink seeing them.
Headache
Today I was uncomfortable.
I'm headache, tired and no appetite.
Sleeping all day untill I had to work.
I'm afraid I got H1N1.
I hope the symptoms will dispear when I wake up tomorrow.
> <
Shanghai friends
The day before yesterday, I hanged around with one of the chines friends.
we went to JINMAO OBSERVATORY88.
it was rather high building.
After that time, while seeing landscapes, I could know about the basis of chinese politics.
Do you know me?
I am a hero.
But I am a robot who is handled by remote control tool.
fourtunely, That one is a boy with justice.
So I called The hero with justice.
But you should think once more.
If remote control tool is taken by evil person.
PS.
hint: in Japan.
I went to Okinawa!!
I went to Okinawa last month with my son and my boyfriend.
Okinawa is southern part of Japan so it was hot there.
We enjoyed snorkel!
We went to the beach which is at an desert island near Naha.
I felt like in dream because the sea was so beautiful and a lot of fish.
And We went to Okinawa Prefectural Peace Memorial Museum.
I think that we shoud never happen the war.
We should never kill another people.
friend's birthday
Today was the day of my chinese friend's birthday.
She is the 26 years old woman and work for travel agency.
Besides, she is pursuing model career in Japan.
We met night club in Tokyo.
Dreams is different, but I think we are similar in terms of pursue own dreams.
I feel like her a sister.
I wonder what I give her present, so could you give me some advice?
Foreigners bab
I can meet foreigners if I go to city in Tokyo but I won't be able to meet a foreigners baby.
It's only adult or childs that I can meet.
I like a baby so I'm always like to meet a foreigners baby if I have an oppotunity.
I could met a foreigners baby at supermarket.
He was so lovely.
I had been watching at him and his dad talked to me.
He's living for 10 years in Japan so he likes to talk with Japanese people.
He wants to learn Japanese skill.
I think our language skill was even.
He wants his baby to speak Japanese so He's learning Japanese everyday.
T.
G.
I.
Friday!
Recently, I'm fascinated with a TV series named `` How I met your mother. `` (Though I don't watch it on TV but the Internet because is hasn't introduced into Taiwan.
)
And thank God it's Friday night so that I have time to watch the newest episode.
This sitcom is talking about a man named Ted telling a story about how he found his true love to his children.
Well, however, Ted hasn't seen the `` lucky `` women from season 1 to 4.
Ha ha!
My favorite character is Barney which is not only a successful businessman but a humorous friend of Ted's.
He always make his own theory about life!
:-D
Except the humor in the series, another reason why I love this sitcom is that I am looking forward to a close, meaningful relationship like the one between Ted and his friends.
Hope our TV station can bring the series into Taiwan soon!
A second date
Today, since people turn out to be more and more rational and have higher demands about the opposite sex, alone with an open mind about dating which nurtured tons of different reality dating shows.
Some of them are really funny, but some are absurd.
I believe one of these shows is a romance killer.
This show features with `` Parents dating Guys ``.
Ridiculous?!
A date which can exude both parties' warmth and charisma.
Sounds a lit bit tricky?
Haha, I just did it in the easiest way, chose a good restaurant, put two nice people together and let them talk!
Without audiences, love judges, parents, just a friendly and private atmosphere which allows them to be theirselves and enjoy the moment.
Last night was a second date I arranged for my friend and hopefully they can work things out!
Crossing my fingers for them ^ _ ^!!! lol
play two role
In the business, I challenge a task that I have not ever done.
this is also very valuable for me.
Meeting the Challenge and Grasping the Opportunity
Without fail where there's great need, great hearts and minds rise up to meet the challenge.
Two mouth later, my professor will take some students to Ohio university in America for a month.
But who wants to go there, he must pass the exam and the interview.
Going abroad is my dream, so I really cherich this opportunity.
It is a good chance to strengthen my knowledge, boarden my horizon, and enjoy the foreign customs, and also realize my dream.
Without any means, what I can do now is to improve my poor English, speaking more, listening more and reading more and so on.
In my opinion, it is a difficult process to overcome myself, but I must insist on and keep on making it, whatever how difficult it is.
Once you make up your mind, so persevere in doing it.
Yangyang, come on, you can do it.
Yes, you can.
Er... but how to start?
Got the gold medal.
I have been looking for correct my English diary.
Today, I finally found nice site.
I was suprised when I found it. I have been study English for 2years. Because I want to make a lot of friends all over the world.
Yesterday, Kitajima Kousuke who is a breast stroke swimmer, he got the gold medal.
I was excited, He marked new world record. He got it the second time.
He moved to tears when he won.
He is smaller than other people. But he did it.
I impressed very much.
Icy, Snow-covered Trees
Today's pictures are icy, snow-covered trees at the top of Mt.
ZAO.
They are illuminated during night.
They were very beautiful, and they looked as if they were large creatures!
The top of the mountain was very cold although I worn a snowboard wear.
I hope I won't get cold.:)
Wish You Happy In Paradis
I was really shocked by the death of Stephen Gately.
I just listened his Boyzone's brilliant song `` No Matter What `` on the way back home.
Stephen is cute and brave but now he is gone.
When I was in junior high school everything seems boring and no meaning, also I did poorly in study.
One day, I was failed to pass the examination.
At that time I have no place to go, parentes hate a underachieved me but suddenly a fair-sounding floating to my ear' I can't deny what I believe I can't be what I'm not' I was astonished by the voice and lyrics which cheered me up.
Your lovely face look like a ray of hope.
Wish you happy in paradis
Pay attention.
With knowing comes caring, with caring there is an hope that we can find an enduring place within the natural system that supports us.
An environmistalist said in TED.
Oil has been flooding in the gulf of Mexico for three months.
There has been only 15 days without war since human being started recording of history which means uncountable people have been killed and killing at the same time.
On the other side of the world, a great number of people live in less than 1 dollar.
Apparently, the world is lopsided.
All of a sudden, I am wondering how many of us believe we know what's going on outside, watching lots of news as CNN or New York Times play out.
Whether things they play out are plausiable or not, one thing we need to know is that when you try to know what is true, you might be able to help anything that can chage the world in a baby step.
Pay attention.
Diary 2011 / 7 / 6
I'm building an algorithm of computer program even when I have a dream in the night, because I'm doing computer program all day long.
It wasn't correct algorithm, it's like a block puzzle.
I'm piling that blocks up or sorting or something.
I went to Tokyo to work in Japan.---Part-6
For 10 month, I studied Java and Japanese.
It was particularly so very difficulty to study Japanese.
( It was very hard to study Japanese.)
Sometime, I felt frustrated and despairing.
Softball
On next Wednesday, the economics seminor softball match will take place.
I have hardly played neither baseball nor softball, so I practiced today after school.
I had played for 7 years, so I like almost all sports.
However, the experience of volleyball is not always working well for softball because of a form difference.
Anyway, I'm really looking forward to playing the game!!
I start to learn English by Lang-8.
I am a grad student.
I must to read a literature, which wrote in English.
So, I start to learn English for the first time in a decade.
Board Meeting
I will have a board meeting tomorrow.
I am an auditor of the construction company.
Today Japanese construction industry faces serious crisis.
I want to improve this situation.
about reading books
when someone ask me, what's your fovorite thing
I'll respond like that `` my hobby is reading books, `
in fact, most people who are fill out their blank of Hobby,
is not really love to read books,
but I really enjoy reading,, not only books, but papers, articles,
and magazins,
to read some sentenses is stimurate my Brain,
maybe in my Brain, now making new accese of ENG nulln (synaps)
haha,
thanks for reading and fix wrong sentences,,
ps: if you have another more good expression what more use in native comunity and more naturely, I want to learn GOOD sentences,,
All day working!
I have a all day working.
It's means that I have to work from 9: 00a. m. to 10: 00 p. m.
Working in a bookstore is busy but exciting.
I have to work now.
It's too short in break time.
Be leaving
How time flies!
I will graduate from this college in two months. my major is English teaching, and I have got a job as an English teacher in a middle school.
Now the only task is to finish my thesis.
Is it real that I have to leave this college in two months?
Oh, how wanderful the college life is!
I don't want to leave this school and to be a teacher.
Once you get into the society, your life wonn't be simiple as that in college.
I haven't been prepared to face all the things.
Because it is such big change in my lifetime.
Anyway, I will cherish the rest of my college life.
The four years' college life will be a colourful and precious memory for me forever,
We may win a trip to NY!
I'm participating in a university contest involving some tests (I don't feel test is the best word... can you think of a better one?), all about the Millenium Objetives stated by the UNO.
After each team submits its proposal, there's a week for the people to vote their faouvorite on the web.
After that, a jury scores / rates each one, and so the winner for each test is chosen.
There's a final prize for the three ones scoring highest at the end of the contest: they all can enrol for free in a postgrade major course (or a language one, if they haven't finished their career).
Additionally, the first team get to travel to New York!
We won last test, and each of the components of our team got a mobile phone.
As I had just bought a Motorola Milestone (the european version of Droid), I gave it to my father, who's actually very happy with it, since it's a cute small nokia with wifi.
We go firsts now, but since they try to give one prize to a different team each time, we expect the jury to make the ones who go third win this time.
But we still hope we win at last and visit USA!!
Wish us luck:)
At Tokyo Disney Resort!!!
I went to Tokyo Disney Resort in February 8th and 9th with boyfriend.
In the first day, we went to Tokyo Disney Sea.
We rode many attractions and we did shopping in a lots of kind shop.
My favorite attraction was Indiana Jones.
I recommend it!
In the second day, we went to Tokyo Disney Land and we appreciated Cirque du Soleil.
We enjoyed Mickey's Philhar Magic.
It is new attraction.
On the other hand, Cirque du Soleil was so impressive show.
We excited the show!
We enjoyed so much this trip.
I want to stay more ; (
Please correct this sentence.
Today's lesson
Today, it was really cold.
I'm sick of spend in cold weather every day.
I love Sommer.
I'm eagerly waiting for Sommer come.
Anyway, I went to english school before work.
Steeven tought me today.
We didn't talk about the content of textbook much, but we could talk a lot of each other's favorite country, city, food and something special experience.
It was really nice.
It was hot today.
the weather got hot nearly, becauce the air conditioner of our office was broken, I couldn't study at office.
but it close to the text of graduate school, I must work hard to study english, I am stress every da
Shinkansen
URL
I'm proud of Shinkansen.
This is the symbol of a lot of technologies in Japan.
Last month I rode a Sanyo Shinkansen train.
I was surprised at the quiet of the Shinkansen.
I was able to read a book comfortably although the train ran very fast.
yesterday I saw weather forecas
As soon as I woke up this morning, I checked outside.
I opened window but it was not rain.
During the day I waited rain as look up the sky and I was thinking what is the problem with weather forecast organization.
I think we have one of the most powerful computer in the world at that organization but they know nothing.
I was shocked at their disappointing work.
I'm busy.
Tomorrow will be sports day of my daughter's school.
After that, we will go to my mother's home.
I'll return to home in Monday.
See you later!
Street live!
I play street live at every Saturday.
It play on station near.
I am get meeting to many people by street live.
I studied many things from there.
For example...
Courtesy, Gentleness, Inclemency... there still.
Last Saturday, I play street.
Then I get courtesy.
I was very happy.
In the future, I want to sing for Gratitude.
Thank you.
The test for mobile system engineer
Next month, I'm going to take the test for mobile system engineer.
The examination fee cost $ 150.
I think that it's very high.
So I want to pass once.
I want to work hard!!!
lost property
I went to the lost property in the station after work.
I'm glad to took it back.
Early Morning
Today I woke up 7. 30a.
m, because I have to go the ANZ bank to get the saving card.
I will move to city this Saturday.
We should note something what we need.
This is a busy morning.
There are many things I should do.
Japanese tea ceremony
My Japanese friend sent me some tea things of Japanese tea ceremony last month.
I liked how to make the greentea and friends who I have became friends.
I know it's thick and bitter.
After I mede it, I drunk the greentea.
I wonder!
I'll send a massage for my friend...
PLEASE check my mail X (
[ I'm so sorry...
I couldn't send you mail sooner.
You know, The earthquake was too bad for my family.
The tsunami destroyed my mother's country (home?).
But, My gran' ma is safe.
And my cousins are fine also.
:)
I wanted to see them.
However it was too terrible to live.
( There was a power failure until now.)
I pray for them it make a comeback to normal life! 
Someone help me!
What's the difference between `` french fries `` and `` fries potatoes ``?
Can't I say `` fries potatoes ``?
Is this wrong?
The history of my learning English
I started learning English in the first class of my school, when I was six years old.
In Russia this language is an official program in all schools.
You can choose from three: English, French and German, but English is the most popular.
When I was 6, the year was 1993 and in my country we hadn't a lot of good teachers, because over many years before the people hadn't the possibility of treavelling abroad and no chance opportunity to practice language...
But my mother allways says that it's just a pretextes and nothing to prevent you if you have a purpose.
When I was thirteen, I changed schools and started to learn in a gymnasium.
Here all was different, and the teachers too.
In the first lessons of English I didn't understend anything-the teacher didn't say one verb in Russian.
It was horrible!
In the exersise of gramer, which I doing for an houars I can't do correct any sentence.
I looked for every verb in the dictionary and cried...
But several times I passed my exam with `` excellent ``.
But my grammar now is just pre intermidiate.
Then I learning english in the University.
I don't know why, but it's VERY hard for me...
I was the worst in my groupe (the worse group in course:)) But then, little by little, I started to talk in English.
3 years I don't learn English hard, no have a practic, but I now how to wach the favorite films in the originale and how to reed books-it's wondeful!
And now I give the promise for myself, that I will learn english by the leavel entermidiate and more then this level, and I will never neglect it!
Because it very important ; I'll never get a good job without it and I'll never understand a half of a beautifule sites in the Internet!
And I lake to drow in Photoshop and Illustrator, and many other things!
PS.
Somebody, who learning Russian, and all who wants to talk with a russian girl-lets talk by the skype!
A visit to Huang river park
Today, my whole classmates and I went to the Huang River Park.
Huang river is the second longest river of China.
as its name, the water is very yellow carrying lots soil.
It was little cold and windy, so the air is stale.
I was regrateful that I wore a new clothes, when I came back it full of dust.
The river is very long, I can't see the limit, and the water is peaceful.
Everyday learning!
These days my lovely boy is getting naughty.
He is crowling everywhere as his instinct tells.
When he gets silence, it is dangerous sign to me.
He is chewing something really dangerous.
Today he chewed a piece of kleenex.
He would almost be stucked.
I noticed it because he coughed.
I put my fingures into his little mouth, and pull it out.
While I was washing the dishes, he did it.
I tried to keep an eye on him on doing house work,
but it happened only in a few seconds I didn't see.
Everyday he is growing up little by little, step by step,
and everyday I am learning how I deal with his can-do things.
Spring vacation is coming shortly!
It's been a long time since I wrote a diary last time.
My university started on the January 8th, but it will finish shortly.
How fast time goes by!
When spring vacation comes, I have to study English harder and I'd like to write a diary everyday.
I'm so happy if you comment on my diary.
Oversleep
Today, I have two classes.
But I slept late this morning!
Tomorrow, I have an English class.
I'm absolutely get up early!!
A New Plan for Japan
From the Wall Street Journal today, I found an interesting article about the future plan of Japan.
The article is from the Review & Outlook section.
The title is `` A New Plan for Japan ``.
URL
As far as I am concerned, the article clearly suggests three main solutions for Japan's problems.
Actually, there are not only three solutions in the article, but I just picked up three solutions.
I felt this was a good article for both Japanese and foreign people to understand Japan's current situation.
The first solution is to lower corporate and personal taxes.
The taxes in Japan are relatively higher than those in most of other developed countries.
To signal young leaders that entrepreneurship will be rewarded, this solution is important.
The second solution is pension reform to control the exploding cost of old-age payouts.
As you may know, Japan has the second lowest birthrate.
This will result in rapid aging society with fewer children.
The current pension system was mainly created in 1985.
I think it's already outdated.
The third solution is immigration reform.
As mentioned above, because Japan will become the aging society with fewer children, Japan needs people from foreign countries.
However, inviting foreign people are not easy due to the following two reasons.
First, Japan is an island country, so many Japanese people have not had much opportunity to communicate with foreign people.
Second, many Japanese people can not speak foreign languages very well.
This solution is easy to say, but not easy to implement.
The longer Japan delays, the harder it will be to implement the solutions.
To improve the current situation is really difficult, but it seems to me that it is possible.
I believe Japan can thrive again with the right leader and the right reforms.
I also want to be of some help to revive Japan.
noooooow...
I'm dying for time!
It's a pain to do my homework.
Now, I am making an album to give hostfamily in NZ.
I'm looking forward to see them!
Starting on-line shopping.
I have been here, NY for 4 months.
My NY life is getting change.
For example, today I ordered some clothes on the internet shop!
I felt fulfillment!
It is a very simple and easy work for American, especially for me, this work is not simple one.
When I was in Seoul I used to shopping on website.
There are many products that are more cheaper than off-line stores.
After left Seoul, I didn't use the on-line stores.
Because I have a something like phobia with the internet shopping.
I couldn't believe the method of charging.
I suspected that way.
Because it was much simple than Korea method.
I just need credit card numbers, that's all!
I was worried, whether another people catch my numbers.
Finally, I choose the official web site.
Because I could feel more safe and comfortable.
I visited A & F official website.
I was surprised!!
It was very cheap!!!!
There is no A & F official store in Korea, so private people sell that brand clothes.
And the prices are very expensive!!
Because of this experiences, I couldn't stop shopping on A & F website.
I ordered some clothes and they are going to ship on FEB.
I'm a little bit disappointed about the speed of shipping, but it doesn't matter, I'm really satisfied with the price and design of clothes.
I expect the arriving would be happen very soon!
And, I will try to use the E-bay, as soon as possible!
hahaha
the very fisrt diary on Lang-
When the first day of 2010, like the other years, I made the new year resolution.
One of them is to study English hard.
Bur this year is a little bit different with the other year.
Because I am planning to move to the foreign company which means my ability to speak and write english sould be upgraded.
So I decide to write the english diary as a way to study english.
And luckily, I found THIS SITE!!
I believe it really works to write english diary here to improve my english skill.
typhoon is comin
A big strong typhoon is coming towards middle area of Japan.
There is a strong rain falling and a strong wind blowing here, so I closed all shutters to protect the windows and its noise.
I'm worried if I can commute to my office tomorrow morning.
Language is difficult.
Today, I quarrelled with my wife over a trivial matter.
My poor expressions made her irritated.
I should watch my language.
More than, I should more consideration for her feelings once more.
This matter made me realize the important things.
first experienc
My eleven months old son could stand by himself for the first time today!
He started to cry hard after that, though.
I'm want to learn english
Hello, everybody.
My name is Hsiang-Chin.
My english is very bed.
But I want to learn english, so my friend Charles tell me this personals website.
I'm to know nothing about grammar, and I'm afraid to speak english.
In fact, I want to say much something, but write english very tired.
July 18th
Hello! I'm sorry to late dialy ; (
Today, I had sleeped only two hours.
So I feel sleeping all day.
Why I still up late, because I watched ladies soccer game! The game was Japan called `` Nadeshiko Japan `` vs America.
This game was very tough game for each team.
The half game was score less drow, the second half was drow.
Extra game was drow too! I was very strained by PK! I'm afraid of watching PK.
Fighnaly, Japan won the game, so `` Nadeshiko Japan `` is top team in the world!! I was exciting, so I can't sleep ;) But I don't regret watching soccer.
I want to play something sports! Thank you very much:)
First write
I have started lang-8 today.
I decided that I will write diary everyday at lang-8 about dairy thing to learn English.
Today, I took a walk around my house by bicycle.
I visited Freemarket which held at park.
The sounds of the step
People seems to have particular own sounds of steps.
I can recognize a person's ones, because it is a matter of life or death for me.
Yes, it is my boss's one.
Before he open a door of a room where I am, I hear it and shape up, so if I fail to hear it and he accost me, I'm really surprised and suspected by him even though I didn't do something bad.
I thank my ear for my survival until now.
Which is the good for MMA fighter to be strong or to win?
So many MMA fighters thought I want to be more stronger than I thought.
This is the most necessity thing for them but my opinion is deffrent from them.
Even if they are strong but they sometimes counldn't win.
Because MMA is sports but they shouldn't think MMA is sports.
There are a fighters who don't think MMA is not sports and if they seems to lose the fights they are going to try to kill their competitor and so that sometimes the strong lost by the weak.
I want to say is no future in just only the strong.
Fedor who is Russian, I think he is the one of them.
He is called the one of the best fighter in the world.
3: 25 a. m. at JS
It is 3: 25 a. m. at Japan Standard Time (JST).
I'm so sleepy.
But I must do my homework!
I don't know.
I don't know how to use lang-8.
please tell me how to use lang-8.
today, I went univercity.
english class is test: (
Thursday October 22nd 2009
It's two ten in the afternoon right now.
In fact, at this time, I'm not supposed to write in my diary on Lang-8.
But, I'm going to do it now, becuase my laptop is supposed to get repaired, and in a couple of hours, the mechanic is going to be here and pick up my laptop.
So, there's not much time left.
Well, the reason why I call the repair is because big noise is made and screen often wave.
It have been about eight months to purchase that, so any service is free.
Oh god.
now here he's coming.
I got ta get the intercom.
english accents
okay right now I want to know what is the best way to learn the English accents?
since I'm weak in understanding the accents of the language.
So I hope anyone here can give me some tips or steps that I should take in order to improve my communication skill
Thanks =)
I am new here
I am new here and I don't know if it is right place to write...
One of my friends, yoshimi, introduced me about this website.
it is good to exchange culture and language that we are trying to learn.
I will try to write everyday, I am planning to write to a bussiness person soon, so I really need your help.
Thank you
It's raining, not men.
Is almost 4: 30 pm and I haven't done my housework yet, it's been a very hot day, I don't feel like doing anything, I was thinking about jumping into the pool, but I have to wash it and fill it first and that is going to take some time.
What else can I do?
Uhh, it's raining!
I'm gon na dance in the rain, yes, that's what I'm going to do.
If I get a cold, I'm going to give you tell you first.
Thanks for reading and correcting.
See you, guys!
only some sentences
It can't be told by simple words.
I dreamed her the night before yesterday.
I dreamed that I found her just sitting by my side when I waked.
Are the sentences above right?
I meet a friend today.
Today, I meet a friend.
She is my old friend.
For long time, I didn't see her.
So My heart flutters with expectation.
She is still being cute.
I drank the beer with her.
I asked her if she have boyfriend or not.
She answered me `` Yes, I have a boy friend. `
I disappointed it a little.
But I'm OK.
Someday, I will make a girl friend.
Come to me chance surely.
Tex-Mex
Tex-Mex is a popular food in Texas.
It is a combination of American and Mexican cuisine.
It features heavy use of melted cheese, beans, chili and tortillas.
It is very nice.
Only problem is that it is very heavy food.
When I have a Tex-Mex at lunch, I can't eat anything at night....
Hello!
I started lang-8.
I'm learning architecture now.
Everyday, I'm very hard to learn it.
But recently, I wanted to speak English.
If I speak English fluently someday, I want to go abroad.
And I want to see the wonderful architectures of foreign countries.
That's why, I started it.
I want to make many friends!
heavy stomach
I woke up earlier than recently today.
Because I felt headache and heavy stomach.
I thought why I felt bad in the bed.
I had a dinner at 11pm yesterday and slept down as soon.
I didn't feel that before several years, I did same things.
I was disappointed that I was not young already!
Happy new year
We have three days holiday, so I spend these days on playing.
Though today is second day of new year, I say best wishes for my friends all the same.
Happy new year, my friends and my relatives.
Yesterday I got up late as usual, and then had lunch, went to supermaket with my good friend, and bought something to my family.
Yesterday was a buzy day, but very happy.
I feel the time past faster than usual.
How time flies!
This is in 2009, it's so fast.
I elder than before.
Today I had a tour of this city by bike.
It's nice, and I like it, if I have enough time, I will do it again.
So Sorry!
I didn ` t write here for a long time because I find a job.
I worked as a waitress in a cafe.
It was very difficult work because we have to fag overtime.
Every day, 15 hours... without interruption.
But it was very interesting work too.
We have many foreigneres as our clients and I really could try my strength in English) It ` s so interesting to tolk with the Britishes, Germanes, Italianes, Danes, Finnes, Croates...
and many others)
One Dutch always ask us `` How are you? ``, nobody understand him, except me and we could talk with him for a long time.
It was difficult, but very interesting time)
After my hard-days I am going to go to Belarus, to Minsk)
Asashoryu's Retirement
Asashoryu is a Sumo champion.
Sumo is one of the Japanese traditional sports.
He has been accused of puching a man while drunk recently.
Sumo champion, called yokozuna, is required to be strong not only phisically, but also spiritually.
He is one of the most strongest Sumo wrestler in the Sumo history.
I am not familiar with the sport, but I know his name.
He is as famous as even I know.
It is a pity that he retires because of this boring case.
An Backpacke
During the last summer vacation, I traveled around Asia ; Melaka & KL (Malaysia), Siem Reap (Cambosia), and Bagan (Myammer).
I met a Japanese Backpacker When I was in KL.
We lived in the same guesthouse and we were the only Japanese who was there.
We became friends soon.
He is 27, older than me by 6 years.
He is experienced backpacker.
He said He traveled around this world.
His travel stories were really interesting and exciting.
We talked and stayed up late every night.
Especially I like His stories in Thailand and India.
That was really fun.
When the last day of my stay there, He said He would plan to go to see Mt.
Kinabalu in Borneo Island.
Today I read his blog.
It says He is in Isreal now.
Then I know Backpacker is always freewheeling.
The first diary
Hello, everybody
I'm very surprised and happy to find such a wonderful website.
I haven't understood the system of this well yet, however, I can't help posting my first diary.
As for ordinary Japanese people, my English level is supposed to be high to some extent.
Actually, everybody in my company counts on me when it comes to English, for example, the customer or the documents from U.
S.
A.
But as you know, my writing ability is like a child play.
I'm always dreaming to get my English composition proofread by English native speakers.
If you notice something, for example, grammatical error, unnatural expression, please tell me.
This time, I dare to write a diary without using my dictionary.
So the contents are probably poor..
May it is sunny tommorrow...
May it is sunny tommottow...
I'm planning to go climbing the mountain with friends tommorow.
I wish it'll be sunny..
or cloudy may be better because I don't want to burn my skin so much.
The mountain is called `` OOYAMA `` which means a big mountain.
It is said from long time ago that you can be healthy and happy or your wis come true if you climb this mauntain.
On the top of mountain, there is a shrine contracted in 700's.
We, friends since Junigor high scholl, are very interested in this legend.
Water, lunch, and own wish will be packd in our each backpack.
Because it has been raining for 3days, I made `` TERUTERU-BOZU `` wishing sunshine.
They say it'll be sunny if you make `` TERUTERU-BOZU ``.
It is old custom to make it in Japan although only children do it in these day..
so I may be child.
w
Photo No, 1 shows how it is hung on the window in my room.
Usually tit is hung under the roof, but I could' nt do it.
Phot No2 shows what TERUTERU-BOZU is like. is is made of paper and has eyes and mouth looking like joy.
They looks lik swimming in the watery sky now, but tommorrw.. they will be dancing in sunshine! ^ ^
Dancing
I went to a gym last night.
I joined an aerobics class.
Everyone who joined this class were very good.
Even midleage man was better than me!
I am beginner.
When everyone jumped left, I jumped right.
Oh nooo.
I made mistakes a lot.
I wished I could sink into the floor.
It was very hard and I was very tired.
At any rate, it was fun!
I will join this class next time.
Don't be such a smart person.
Hysterically, I am a well planned person so there are always full of schedules that keep me from anything spontaneous.
So to speak, there are certain things I have to do almost every day before the sun sets off such as reading a book, watching news, and writing anything.
Otherwise, I feel something wrong as if I didn't do a homework that would punish me when I finally hand out the empty note to a meticulous teacher.
Ironically, I find it enjoying hanging out with my friend who came here early morning, taking a whole day from me, doing something stupid such as killing flies, making me think what is more important.
Don't be such a smart person who might lose better things.
I am very stressful~ now.
I spoke English today.
It is very difficult to say anything..
so, I said English with wrong words..
English is very difficult.
When I talk, I forget what I say,,
very simple things..
I felt very tired.
Beautiful flowers bloomed in the sky!
I want you to see these pictures.
It's very lovely.
It looks like some jewelries.
I took these on August 15.
I thought there were about a hundred thousand people at the grounds.
I had never seen such a many people, so I was very surprised:).
By the way, what do you like to do in summer?
Plese tell me: 
Gardenig
Hi.
How are you doing?
Yesterday, I went to Home Depo to buy a bag of soil and a planter.
Oh, I just remember, I also bought a seat of starting pots for that herbs.
After I got home, I started repotting and sowing.
Actually I just have
a patio, not garden.
: (
I wanted to do sowing of Violas but starting pots was lack, so I would go to Home Depo again tomorrow.
sensitivity
I want to use the word `` sensitivity `` properly.
a) I'm lacking in the sensitivity to whether an expression is formal or informal.
b) I have to cultivate (enhance / enrich / sophisticate) the sensitivity to others' feelings.
Is there anything wrong with them?
Particularly I want to know which verb is incorrect in (b).
English skill
hello
Hello.
My name is Adrian but my friends call me Adi.
I'm an 18 years old boy and I live at Romania.
I am a beginer at learning english, and I want to improve.
This is the reason why I created an account on this site.
I hope you will help me.
Thank you.
human relations
I think it is difficult to communicate with others.
Especially, in company, there are many relations.
For example, there are my boss, my superiors and my juniors.
I want to know how does communicate with each other in foreign countries.
It doesn't mean I'm not going well.
I'm confused because there are various people, and many thoughts.
OMG
Unfortunately...
I think I cought a cold:-
.. in LA... omgomgomgomg...!
I took a medicine, but I still feel bad.
I should sleep today...:-(
Yesterday, I went to the shopping mall called `` Dessert Hills `` and I found a lot of reasonable clothes, bags, shoes and so on.
I bought a lot of stuffs and walked a lot...
that's why I'm sick now. lol
But I had a great time!
Now, I'm gon na go to sleep....
bye~
at school
I'm at school now.
It is cold this morning!
So I wore a sweater.
Have a good day ;)
Self-introduction
My name is Ella, I'm Chinese name's Momeifen.
I'm twenty years old.
I words in An e-commerce company.
I like to make friends.
I like English, but did not and I communicate in English, my English has been declining.
So I hope you can understand a lot of foreign friends.
Drinking party
Because of medicine I was not able to drink alcohol, I wanted to drink, though.
But I enjoyed drinking party!
Although I want to write its contents more, I am sleeping...
Good night.
What I did today
My son got sleep at long last.
He took a bath at seven, but he didn't try to get to bed.
Because he still want to play.
I regretted to keep putting him down for 3 hours during the day.
It has been raining since this morning.
So, the temperature got down as compared with yesterday.
Saturday
I always watch TV at Saturday night.
I can't watch TV weekday, Because I am working weekday.
I like comedy story and history story.
Child's First Errand
How old were you when you first went on an errand?
Today, I enjoyed a TV program about little boy's or girl's first errands.
Children who appear on this TV program laugh, cry and go shopping.
Their parents send children on their first errand.
It's so funny really.
This TV program reminds me of my first errand. haha.
* * * To me, the new Lang-8 design is not easy to use... * * *
PART-1
PART-2
New computer
I bought a new notebook PC.
It's a little bit expensive for me, but I'm so happy to get it.
I carry it anywhere, and show it to my friends.
They were interested in my notebook and touched it.
I decided that I manage it as carefully not to break.
Epitome of Cool
Sometimes, When I get back from college, I feel that I can do absolutely nothing but watching a movie.
I feel so exhausted but I can not sleep because If I slept then when I wake up, I'll have to start studying again or going to college.
Watching a movie is like the fun pause between two busy periods.
Yesterday, I watched a movie called The Expendables.
It's an action movie.
It didn't wow me really, not like Inception anyway, because its story wasn't strong or strange enough.
It was very plain and straight forward.
The ending was great, though.
Jason Statham recited a piece of poetry that made it a funny ending.
There is only one line I didn't understand.
What is the ``
Epidemy of Coo
``?
Here is ending.
Enjoy!
dairy
But the stuation is being recovering by helping not only Japanese but aloso all over the world.
Unfortunately, we can't say there is no problem at Fukushima reactor.
Now I'm in Nagoya, Aichi.
I am going to move out to Saitama (Kanto area) from here just because I study at the university in Saitama.
I'm very worry about the radiation.
And Kanto area reaches the electronic shortage.
We don't know when the situation recover perfectly.
I might have suffered from heatstroke.
I might have suffered from heatstroke.
I felt dizzy and had to cool my bedroom down.
Then I drank of bottle of Pocari Sweat and slept for a while.
So I'm fine now.
Exams....
The worst thing in life: (
Good morning:)
Exams are the worst thing in life: D, It really is
I know that It is essential but It make me really stressed out: (
I Love to learn new things especially languages but I want to learn it because I want to not because I have to, you know
The worst thing in the world is sitting in a room with only your pen and watch the time go awa
What if I don't remember what I have studied because of stress and worry!
But whatever I will do my best and try to work hard enough to do well in these exams, hopefully: D
Prey for me: D: 
Reading Books in a bat
I really like reading books.
My precious time is the time when I read books taking a bath!
I usually take a bath more than half an hour.
After my families go to bed, I concentrate in reading books.
Nothing bothers me, I can be absorbed in books.
However, I have to be careful, or books will swell up.
I read documentaries, science fictions, mysteries...
and many more.
But I don't like love stories.
I think knowing others' love affair doesn't make any sense for me.
I like the stories which can not be expected and be like a rolle
coaster.
Earthquake aftershock
After great earthquake happened, I often feel shaking though it's not earthquake.
I thought earthquake is coming when I wash my face in the morning.
I'm so nervous at earthquake.
I made an emergency bag in case.
And I have to fix my furnitures to stop slipping.
Preparing in case is very important.
I learned it.
my weekend
Good morning!
Last weekend was very nice!
On Friday I went with my class and my teacher to the Botanical Garden.
It is very nice.
We walked around the garden, we saw the animals and differents trees ; we had a smoll lunc
I want to improve myself.
Do you like making a plan to do something?
I like making a plan, but I can't fulfill my plan.
For example, I like making a schedule of one day.
I write something to do for one day on a notebook, and I try to fulfill them.
For three days I can keep my schedule, but after three days I can't do that.
I think I'm a lazy person, so I tend to choose an easy way.
I want to do many things for one day.
Maybe I'm greedy, and want to try too many things.
On the other hand, I think I spend too many hours to use a computer.
I like checking SNS sites.
It is fun indeed, but it is waste time for me.
If I quite checking sites so many often, I think I can save my time more.
Then I can do another things.
I need to reconsider about how to use a time.
Though I'm not good at using a time at all, I want to try to be good at using a time.
I must make a good schedule which I never give up on it way to.
I want to have more strong mind to keep my schedule, and I want to control a time, not time control me.
Halloween
Hi everyone it's been a while since I wrote the last diary here.
I'd like to write about my first Halloween.
We don't celebrate ancestors or dead like the way western people do.
My city has Gozan no okuribi.
But it's like
I had a so much fun this Halloween.
On Friday I was Scream and on Saturday I was a blond hair girl.
It remind me high school festival.
I saw a lot of funny costumes on the street which has a lot of clubs.
What I found through clubing as a girl is some guys are so disgusting!!
Especially one guy who try to dance with me was so disgusting!!
He was getting too close and touch my ass with his leg even I'm a man.
Here is a funny story.
On Saturday we went to a club after drinking.
The club has some small stages and I was dancing on it then a guy came to dance with me.
He didn't notice that I'm also a man.
After 5 or 10 minutes dance, at last he noticed I'm a man.
He was like' OMG!!' n hold his head.
Anyway I enjoyed a lot!!
How was your Halloween??
What was your costume??
How do you deal with that kind of guy in a club??
Thank you for reading!!:)
It would be great if you leave a comment or corrections.
Simplification
I wasted too much time on watching Youtube.
I watched without any want to watch.
That's a kind of' inertia'.
Most of the videos are less enjoyable.
Political ones are always full of childish swearings.
I don't want to regard these comments as representing the average intellectual level of the viewer as a whole.
I had to shft to better one, more fruitful one, even obeying that inertia.
Then, I found a Japanese TV program introducing Wittgenstein's' Tractatus Logico-philosophicus'.
I was interested in how they explain the book which I read few years ago (in Japanese) only the initial and threw up.
But that program was trashy ; it simplified the discussion too much, and pretended that the matter is really simple.
I found that those who swearing or explaining are not only simplifying the matter too much, but also tending to neglect what is really not simple.
These neglections are sometimes violent.
Of course, any understanding of objects may involve some simplification (as I'm doing now).
But it never means that the objects themselves are really simple.
We just have simple ideas about complex objects.
Although I don't understand Wittgenstein's that book, it seemed that he didn't distinguish between ideas and objects.
It gave me a sense of strangeness.
I know there are a lot of things which I doesn't understand yet.
And I will never understand all, of course.
Okaxile
`` Exile `` is the one of the most famous vocal group.
But today, I'll introduce you very rare unit `` Okaxile ``.
The first person on this video is Okamura who is a member of Japanese comedy couple `` Ninety-nine ``
And he lead the dance at this music.
From what I hear, I don't know if it's true, he was a famous dancer in his hometown.
He joined Exile at this moment and danced with them.
He had funny and intersting dance.
You can check other videos about Okaxile.
I hope you enjoy this video.
I'm really into this song recently.
This youtube video is so good at symphony of music and image.
Cool!
I imagine only `` cool `` or `` awesome `` or `` dope ``.
December
Time fries like an arrow.
It is really thanks for my wife, has started learning English.
We have enjoyed it.
The fall in Korea
23rd October.
Suddenly, I've departed for DamYang is located in southern Korea with my camera.
In my plan.
- First, I go to GwangJu by bicycle.
- Second, when I arrive on GwangJu, I stay a nigt in GwangJu.
- In the early moring next day, I depart for DamYang.
- And I visit Metasequoia street, Bamboo park, River forest and Bamboo museum.
But....
My plan was break down at second.
That's why my bicycle was stolen at GwangJu.
Inevitably, I should go to DamYang by bus.
......
Althogh I failed my plan and I was lonely, I'm satisfied my travle because There is good landscape.
I'm attaching some of photo is I've taken in DamYang.
URL
I will show a soccer at midnight
Today is Asia Champion League first match.
My team stay at Kuwait, IN PM 10: 00.
the new in the lang-8
Today, I become a member of lang-8.
I really need help.
My gramma is very poor, and my poor gramma always drives my SAT gramma teacher crazy.
And I will take the SAT2 on May 7th.
This is a little bite hard for me because I have to deal with the tasks in school those which surrounds the college entrance exam in China too.
So I want to find some friends on this web site to offer me some help.
Finished one of my works!!
My sister asked me to translate some documents into
Korean since Korean often come to my sister's work place.
Luckyily, I have some Korean friends so I worked on it askin
my frineds weather the translation is correct or not.
I was really really sensitive at work because this is a nationa
related documents, which means I was not allowed to make
mistakes!!
I'm sure there were some mistakes.
It's impossible to grip the nuance perfectly since I'm Japanese.!
Oh..
this is just the execuse.
( laughing laughing)
Anyway I did my best more than I could and finished.
I feel so comfortable now!!!!!
Year!!!
Hello!
Keeping a diary is difficult to me.
I want to keep a diary everyday, but it is not simple thing to me.
I know the reason, so I hope to correct the reason this time.
I also hope to improve my poor English ability this time.
Please correct my sentence or grammar.
I think I have poor English grammar ability, so thank you very much for your advice.
Thank you!
Pizza
I ate a pizza for dinner yesterday
It was a mergherita pizza.
I like a cheeze and a basil.
I want to ate it again someday.
General roles for the timing to make money in the Tokyo stock exchange
I believe and we can make money by trading Tokyo stocks according to the following roles:
1.
Japanese stocks fall afternoon of Friday and get back every Monday morning, because many Japanese traders are more pessimistic than others.
So it is good time to buy stocks Friday afternoon and sell them Monday morning.
2.
The movement during the first 30 minutes after the stock market opening is controlled by the dominant tendency made by the US traders.
3.
The stock prices rise on the next days after Japanese national holidays, vacation weeks (April 29th to May 5th in spring ; around August 15th in summer ; 19th o 23th September in fall ; 28th December to 3rd January in winter).
So primarily we can buy stocks at the day just before the vacations and sell them at the next days after holidays except the year end.
In the case of the year end, we need to sell stocks whose quotes are lower than the original ones because we can reduce the capital gain tax by reporting the loss to the Japanese IRS.
4.
The best time for buying stocks is 10: 30 or 2: 30, whereas that for selling stocks is 9: 00 to 9: 05 or 2: 55 to 2: 59.
Today's lunch at McDonald' s
Today, I had lunch at McDonald's near my university with my friend.
We sat outdoor seats.
So, I got sunburned a little.
I felt summer will come soon in Japan.
So, I hope that summer will pass fast.
An interesting TV show was aired last Saturday.
It was about what foreigners are wondering while they live in Japan.
It is natural for us, but they think it seems strange.
It is hanami.
In Japan, strange custom is remained as for hanami.
When we have hanami, we have to get place before starting.
Usually new employees are asked to sit on a blue sheet for hours to occupy a nice place.
It seems to be their first task.
So, whenver I pass by, I am sure they must be new employees.
In black
Today, my country is rainy.
Yesterday, I went to see.
Very hot, and It was dry.
All my rotations are interesting summer vacations.
But, we have to finish term examination.
Please give me power!
I can not come to here for around 2 weeks.
If a test is over, I come again.
see you.
About my friend in Oshima
My friend works in Oshima.
Oshima is a small island nearest to Tokyo in Japan.
We were classmates in college as an undergraduate.
Two months ago I went Oshima to meet him.
He was fine but bored with his work.
Since few customers come there, he has nothing to do for a long time.
So he will try to study about something in that his time.
I recommended that he study English or Chinese with me.
I wish we were on lang-8.
wii
Now, Wii my house.
My university friend forgot to take it home.
Spree from my house after an hour, so we'd like to play while drinking.
By the way, dou you know' Lucky Taxi'?
I tried to make sentences. 1
Hello!!
Everyone!
Are these sentences OK??:)
Switch off the light when you go to bed.
I use an e-mail to keep in touch with my old friend.
Sadly, my dad is going bald recently. lol
Can anyone help?
The following is my friend's diary.
He is a junior high school student and studying English.
Can you give him any advice?
Sunday Feb 21
I got up at nine.
I ate rice and miso soup.
Today, I was very free.
So, I thought that what to do.
Then, I remembered very important thing.
My room is so messy because I was busy recently.
So, I clened my room very hard.
I was too tired.
Tuesday Feb 23
I got up at seven.
I ate rice and miso soup.
I went to school.
Today first period was `` C.
T ``.
`` C.
T `` is challange time.
Second period was English.
It's easy for me to study it.
Third period was P.
E.
I enjoyed playing table tennis.
Fourth period was fine arts.
I don't like fine arts.
Fifth period was science.
I don't like science too.
Sixth period was math.
I like math.
I came back to home.
I went to a park,
So, I enjoyed playing soccer and baseball with my friends.
I was very tired.
And also, can anyone answer this?
Which is correct?
1.
It's getting dark.
It (is able to / may) rain at any moment.
2.
I will (call by / call up / call off / call at) Tom to tell him that we are coming.
3.
Please lend me a pen to write (with / on).
Thank you for reading!
It seems that I should teach my students at 8: 00 pm tonight.
When I went to school, today also there were only a few students in the classroom.
I'm no longer suprised that situation.
All I want to know is that why they couldn't come to my calss.
I asked someone about why they were not here.
He explaned the reason in Swahili, so I wasn't able to understand, but I realized that they were in under the punishment.
Almost all students. 3 / 4.
Do you remember my journal which I wrote 2 days ago?
About the CHOTA MAJI.
So, They are turned over the progress of classwork.
As I was thinking what can I do to keep up with other class, one of the class member proposed to have a class at night.
I don't have any option, so it seems that I should teach my students at 8: 00 pm tonight.
When I was in Korea, if we skipped the calss because of other affairs, they seemed very happy.
However, in here, my students don't want to skip the calss.
Whenever I have a class at night (actually, sometimes we have an extra class at night like today), I was satisfied of my students who listened devouring every word.
I love my students~~~~~~~
Broken..
My MP4 is broken.
I can' t live without music!
So I have to dug my first MP3 (1GB) out from my drawer.
But it can only input about two hundred and fifty songs.
When will my P4 come back~~~~???
The classes these days are difficult for me, so I have to study very hard..
I always stay there for a long time all day.
By the way, listen to music there is also a good choice~ (ha, ha)
Do you take a nap?
I'm always sleepy after eating lunch.
I used to lie down on the sofa after finishing it.
Recently I read a book about the digestion.
Acording to this, taking a nap is not good for digestion.
It recomends us that even if we are sleepy after lunch, we should not sleep,
and if we get very sleepy, we should go for a walk to forget our sleepness.
Finally I decided to practice it.
After lunch of today, I brought the book to the sofa and began to read it.
But two hours later I found I had been sleeping until that time.
I went to sleep after all today too.
I wonder I will be able to stay up tomorrow.
The entrance exam season
The entrance exam season has arrived.
My sister took entrance exams a few days ago, and she's waiting her results.
My brother will take it in this Friday.
My sister is university, my brother is high school.
I need to care for them.
The Sign of Recovery
Despite some analysts say that Japan has been at the bottom of the depression, I agree with the opinion that our country starts to show the sign of recovery from the damage caused by the earthquake.
There are two evidences for this: movements and discussions.
First, I can see some movements of peoples to recover from the damage now.
For example, there is the movement to buy the commodities made in Fukushima.
When the earthquake had happened, the economic activity was depressed strongly.
We thought that it was not good to have a satisfied days when people in the damaged area were suffered.
Therefore, we stop buying commodities, especially luxuriant items.
As a result, the economy of Japan got stagnant.
Although that, we have already realized that the stagnant economy was more bad for the recovery of Tohoku area.
We have to spur the economy to supply works and money in the area.
Because of this reason, the movement has happened.
Second, the discussions about the plans how we recover from the earthquake has been activated.
For instance, the usages of the area contaminated by the nuclear energy are now discussed on Japanese newspapers frequently.
Some scientists advocate that that area should be used as the plants of the solar energy because the area is not good for living and there are a serious shortfall of electric energy.
Such discussions are able to be heard around Japan now.
All in all, Japan is trying to recover from the stunned situation now.
I hope Japan will recover from this situation and reply other countries for their helps in the future.
Jpanese energy polic
By the great big earth quake in March 11, Japanese energy policy has changed drastically.
Many people claim that `` we should not use nuclear power plant!!
`` It's true that radiation pollute people or vegetables, soil, air and sea more or less.
However, I don't think that nuclear power plant should stop immediately.
According to today's newspaper, if we continue current policy, (now 34 power plants are stopped among 54) it is definitely Japanese economic make worse.
Because if we can't use electricity fully, electricity fee will increase and some corporation decide their factory to move foreign country.
Then, Japanese employment will face great big difficulty.
Most of Japanese people can't speak English.
So if we lose our employer, we can't have job!
The important point is `` order ``.
I agree that Japanese energy souse will change to natural resource but I advocate that our most important thing now on is to ensure of our electricity.
After that, we change our electricity souse to natural one.
We don't have to change our energy policy if we can't do that safely.
From this reason, I don't agree that nuclear power plant should stop immediately.
This is the thing which often Japanese wives say `` Which is important I' am or your work! ``.
It's same question.
tuition
I tutor a 9-grade student in math because of the upcoming senior high school entrance exam.
Yet she always answer wrong at the same questions that I had taught several times, like negative number multiply by negative number is positive number.
After today's tuition, she will go to a karaoke with her classmates.
She just casually answered the questions and sort of appeared impatient, which made me sort of angry.
Yet I has reflected on myself of my behavior back home.
Not everyone is good at math or should be a mathematician or something like that.
I should have more patience.
Kinect the game with funny guys
At the July 4th party, one of my friends brought Kinect which is a body motion sensing gaming device for XBOX360.
I heard that before but I've never played it and every one over there neither.
After having a beerpong, many people played with it but a funny thing happened on that day.
Two guys were completing against each other for running in an athletic game.
Both of them does not know how to run in the game exactly.
One of the guy tries to run by lifting up his knees a lot and the others are not.
Actually, it requires lifting up their knees higher enough to make Kinect senser to sense their move, so he was correct and keep the fastest speed in the race.
However, the problem is he is a bit too serious so he started moving toward the TV monitor little by little, then finally he slipped on a floor and fell down.
As the result, suddenly he became 7th in the race which is the second from last.
On the other hand, while he is running seriously is falling down, the other guy is keep running, but since he did not lift his knees up, so he kept the booby in the race-until the other guy fell down.
So, the race turns out really funny one since one guy fell down and the other guy runs his slow pace.
It resulted in getting 7th and 8th.
Everyone started laughing and I was feeling like a documentary of a race with a guy who didn't give up even though he fell down in a middle of the race and a guy who keeps running slowly but never give up.
Anyway, it's a one of funniest moment ever.
Be careful during running even though it's a game.
:)
The happiest day of the week
I feel happy when Friday night comes.
The reason is very simple: I don't have to worry whether I can awake in the morning the next day.
These days, this is becoming the happiest moment for me.
^ ^ It seems nothing, but very real happiness to me.
Thanks to my current boss, I'm enjoying my work although I have tons of it.
He's really good at asking someone to do work.
I want to get his techniques someday.
At the same time, I want to get how to say no gently because I want to have much happier moment than sleeping in the morning!
^ ^
My little sister.
I have two sisters and one brother.
I'm their older sister.
And today our youngest sister has her sixth birthday.
I don't know what gifts prepared my parents.
I sewed her a new coverlet (I don't know which word to choose.
It's covered bed over all other sings, like blanket).
In the evening we will nave a little party with barbeque.
Many children like fried sausages very much.
And of course there will be some our friends with their kids.
UW
UW means University of Washington, which locates in a beautiful city whose name is Seattle.
I am here attending in a class that is ARW4.
Before I went to school this morning, I spent one hour jogging around a big lack which is Green Lake near my neighborhood.
It's one of my regular hobby and sometimes it's hard for anyone who can not believe a girl who does this kind of work everyday, but I do exacully.
Balloon lecturer.
`` OMOCHA OUKOKU `` is an amusement park.
A main lecturer was `` DOISAN `` from `` MAGIC POT ``.
`` MAGIC POT `` is my office.
But today is rainy day and yet many audience participated balloon lecturer.
Almost all the audience is family.
I difficult to lecyurer for small children.
I Miss You In Lonelines
Every time I go home, she always says that: `` Oh, my son!
You are so thin and more than ever! `` And then makes good dishes for me.
Then I think of my father.
About 7 years old, I went to a primary school in the town and lived with my father in his school.
Grandma made me a human and Father made me a person.
In my 16s, I did a lot of bad things, but they never abandon me.
So here I want to tell you how much I love.
Rota Island
Last week, I traveled to Rota Island.
It is a small island between Saipan and Guam.
Actually I have traveled there eleven times!
I have some friends in Rota.
Every time I come to Rota, they say me `` welcome back! ``.
They invite me BBQ, picnic and hunting!!
This time, they took me to a coconut crab hunting.
It was really exciting experience.
Coconut crab is active at night so we went to a coconut forest at night.
It was yummy!!
Ideal and reality
It is surely often seen that there is a big difference between ideal and reality.
It's not easy to shorten the long distance between them.
Sometime, such a time when you will have to accept something hard or bitter might be coming in your life.
Now I've been in the bottom of my life never experienced before.
I have too much stress in my everyday life.
I will try to make the gap between my ideal and reality short, but it's not going well lately even in a small matter.
I think I need to be more patient and tolerant towards everything I will be facing in the future.
Who can change yourself is only you.
I could put my stress away a little bit by writing a journal...
Hi (* ^ ^ *)
Good morning (* ^ ^ *)
I am yuu.
I'm the biginner who just began Lang-8.
Please get along well!!
I live in Japan.
I'm a woman.
My heir is not black.
because, It does coloring:)
I will have strengthened muscle for spring vacatio
I felt bad.
I went to the gym which Neyagawa city run so that I can strenghthen muscle.
Maybe, I don't have much muscle than general men.
So I strengthen muscle.
And then, I went to Lowson which is convenience store so that I can work at there at 5 pm.
Its work was easy today, because today's wether was rain.
That is to say, when the weather is rain, people are reluctant to go out.
heartbreak T.
T
I was upset last night, so I went out for fresh air.
My boyfriend often condemned me to be against him.
So I try not to oppose his suggestion, but I felt it useless.
No matter how much I make an effort, he never changes his mind.
This made me hurt, so I went for a walk for a while but he textmailed me' You don't have to come back!
Leave me forever!'
I was very sad.
T.
T
Tuesday, January4201
Today, I'm so happy.
Morning on n's pas a sepiaindre letter.
Mom do hold food.
so.
I make folded egg.
Folded egg make careful, completion.
My sister make egg.
My sister side on, me help.
So, completion egg.
Completion even as, mom come in house.
Mom bat an eyelid.
Mom we make eat, delicious.
So, good feeling
I'm bad at memories.
The restaurant was near my friend's house.
You and I came here once before!
A bad day
Hi!!
I'm happy today, but people seem as if they were very very angry.
When I was walking by the street, two cars were going to kill me!
xD
And people seems as if they were constipated (this word is funny because in spanish `` constipado `` is `` cold ``, and it's eassy mistake the meaning xD).
But I've been happy, and soon I've seen a teacher that was happy too.
This is gorgeous 8)
...
Another new: I've finished my sculpture!
At last!
And this is a secret present for my dad xP
Good day for everyone!!
Celia ^ u ^
Sleep
I can't sleep too long, which will me dizzy.
However, if I don't get enough sleep, I will feel depressed.
On Sunday, there are no activities and no plans.
It is supposed to be a good time to sleep longer.
However, I still got up on time as usual.
I tended to sleep as much as I could when I was younger.
Sleep quality seems to be more important than the time.
Answer
I've been thinking why I want to study English.
Then tonight I got a part of answer.
I will arrange it in English then write down here as soon as possible.
I have a feeling that it is different from everybody.
But everybody has a something reason why they want to study second launguage.
Everybody has different reasons, I think.
I feel happy now for getting my answer.
I want to study hard for explaining my answer.
summer holiday
I made invoices for this month and sent it on this morning.
Today's work was end.
In substantially, my summer holiday started from today.
I took day off for a week.
What a happy am I:-
I'll go to trip Kyushu Japan next monday.
We plan 2 nights 3 days trip.
I can't wait monday!!!
I remember that I could not sleep at night before excursion when I was child.
Music and my father
My father was once a DJ in club when his youth, he got many LP records and CDs.
So I could come into cantact with many Music from Billboard to Classic.
Actually I was truly blessed one.
Cause You may know or may not know, My father's generation was absolutely poor.
Right after the Korean War, there was nothing left.
Everything was completely destroyed including Music.
But there was US Armed Forces in Korea, and they radiobroadcast thier songs meaning Billboard.
My father listened those songs from the radio everyday and recorded it (Illegal these days...) and dreamed his future.
Even though he couldn't eat his fill, but he was happy filling with musics.
He spent all of his money to buy the records or guitar.
Anyways, I got his blood in my vein, I really into the music also.
And I'm really grateful what he inherted me.
Both of Emotionally and Physically.
Those records when he bought his youth, now it's real valuable stuffs:)
My Skill
My English skill is not well.
so that I have studied for two years,
but now I have not skill of english.
pls let me kwon about to study other langage....
A letter from someplace in Tokyo
Well, I'm gon na talk about myself a little bit.
Since I've been to London, I like London very much.
Thank you.
Wedding Reception
I went to the wedding reception of my relative yesterday.
The bridegroom is my brother's wife's younger brother.
He's very good at basketball, and has won a championship in a 3 on 3 basketball competition in Kyushu.
The bride read a letter for her parents, which is often included in Japanese-style wedding receptions, and the letter was very touching.
I remembered my own reception, my starting point yesterday.
( Question ; which preposition is more appropriate, `` for `` or `` to `` in line 5?)
What Would You Do When You're Under Stress?
These days, I'm stressed out for my work.
I think that I'm easily pissed off regarding tiny things recently.
Anyway, I listed up my steps to reduce the stress as you can see the below.
1.
Eating sweetie
2.
Falling asleep
3.
Playing some music instrument
4.
Watching movies
5.
The simple way is eating sweeties.
But I'm afraid to get weight.
What a sad if I get a chubby because of the stress.
If I had no sweeties during hard work, I would suffer from stomach ache because the more stress I have, the more gastric acid my stomach secrete.
Still I had no idea which one is more better between gaining weight and aching stomach.
It's a catch-22 situation for me.
lol.
Speaking of falling asleep, it's the best for me to reduce the stress.
Nevertheless, it is not feasible to take it due to time-constraints.
When it comes to another ways, it's impossible to do these at the office.
Dear Lang-8 friends, what would you do when you're under stress?
I'm happy to hear about it.
As always, thanks for reading my entry.
My Old PC Revived!!
I was gotten a old laptop PC from my mother last month because my mother bought a new PC.
But the running of the PC installed Windows XP is very slow...
^ ^ ; ;
So I installed a new OS called `` Ubuntu ``, which is a linux distribution and free, to be fast the running than former one.
As a result, It worked. ^ o ^ /
The PC using Ubuntu is running well as if it is a new PC!
And I am writing this entry on it with hearing a music.
Maybe, Microsoft may have any crisis!?
Going to translate my blo
I decided to translate my travel blog in two english.
This way I'm going to achive two goals.
First I will improve my skill's in english and second I'll have blog in english.
Because last time, people often asks me, if I have blog.
I replay, `` Yes I have, but in russion ``, so I think it's time to create an english version.
today
I am a colleage student.
I live in Chongqing.
Today is a speacil day.
I am very upset and I feel very tired.
I have no ideas.
Difficulty of Drug's Name resembling Abracadabra
Drug's name is difficult to pronounce.
Usually, can English native speaker pronounce difficult drug nam
such as `` Diethylstilbestrol `` or `` Ibritumomab tiuxetan ``?
For instance, when you saw a article on today's newspaper about this drug,
can you pronounce them at a first glance without consulting a dictionary or website, etc.?
By chance, you can pronounce them correctly only from the alphabet?
In Japanese case, we can not pronounce some Kanji.
I commonly used to ask my family, `` What's pronunciation of this ``?
Home stay
My son has left for Australia last night.
That is his first homestay.
I didn't know whether he worried about or looked forword to, but I hope that it will be special and wonderful experience for him.
I practice for making stories these days.
I practice for making stories with some words and phrases that I studied today.
I made a story, today.
> > >
Kim Yu-Na is one of the few Koreans who succeed at an early age in the world.
Her great success is based on her strong will.
The whole world is keenly interested in her walk of life.
Recently, she was appointed as the U.
S Sports Academy's 2010 Female Athlete of the year.
Congratulations on your winning!
Hmm..
I don't know how to make a sentence with' have close ties with' in the story.
I won't accept that.
Today, I went to school.
Our teacher was angry because recently many people bring on many chocolates, a cellular phone and all that.
But I never bring on them.
So I am shut of.
But my teacher said `` If you find person with many chocolates, a cellular phone and all that, you must warning to the person.
If you turn a blind eye to, you are tantamount of the person. `` But I was unconvinced.
Because I think that those people do not listen warning.
Washing pedometer
I am always wearing a pedometer.
Every day, I look forward to record the distance walked.
Yesterday, I took off my pants leaving pedometer in the pants pocket.
My wife washed it without knowing the pedometer in the pocket.
After washing, the pedometer didn't work.
Even before, she accidentally washed iPOD in a pocket and iPod didn't work.
My wife said `` You are wrong leaving something in the pocket.
``
I said `` You are bad to wash without checking nothing in the pocket. `
Who is wrong?
First challenge for EIKEN examination pre grade 1, part1
I will take English exam at June 12th.
This examination name is `` EIKEN ``.
EIKEN is popular English exam for Japanese people.
I think that EIKEN exam is made by Japanese people for compulsory educational student.
Of cause, usual adults are able to take exam.
Maybe, TOEIC examination is normal English examination all over the world.
I feel difficult TOEIC more than EIKEN.
I want evidence of learning English.
and then, I will take EIKEN exam.
Achooooooooooooooo!!!!!!!!!
I just can't stop sneezing today because of hey fever (+ _ +) I take a medicine every morning, but it doesn't work these days.
How can I spend spring time more confortable??
Jogging
My hobby is jogging.
Today, I have ran about 5km along the river.
Jogging makes me comfortable so much.
According to brain science, Jogging have effect to be rich serotonin.
If you feel depression, it might be good to jog especially in the sunny day!
kamakura
I visited Hase temple.
Many peple visit there.
Piano
They was good players.
My two host brothers were playing piano.
Older host brother got a second prize!
I think that competition was big.
It's the spring drizzle, so I'll walk to wet through it...?
I heard someone on TV said `` It's the spring drizzle, so I will walk to wet through it ``.
Not sure because it is long ago, when a servant put up an umbrella for his master, the master replied the words to the servant.
It is raining right now.
I have a marathon today.
I don't like running in the rain very much certainly.
That is why I said the words above.
Umm, okay, okay, It is just a spring drizzle, I will run to wet through it!
today
I went to sinzyuku with my family.
Then, I bought notePC at Big Camera.
So, I write this diary whit it!!
It was very difficulet that I set up this PC.
So, my father helped me.
I want to use my PC well.
I will practice it!
Is environmental protection compatible with economic growth?
In this day and age, economic growth often comes with the improvement of technology.
Thus, it's hard to say our prosperities in developed countries are compatible with environmental protection.
However, apparently, this is cahnging.
A lot of companies began to come up with the ways technology and a lot of commodities can go with environment.
In some cases, there could be `` greenwash ``.
However, raised awareness is getting rid of this trend as consumers are more eager to purchase authentic eco-friendly commodities.
Even though I say it myself, I'm using some soaps that don't contain chemical substances.
I heard that some detergents can be harmfull when they are drained to the river or ocean, rendering local people unable to avoid some danger from the pollution.
From the look of it, eco-concious might be the watchword from years to come.
insomnia
yesterday I and insomnia, mind is all the mess of things!
Climbing
Hi everyone.
Thank you for always correcting my mistakes.
------------------------------
2009 / 03 / 12
In order to drink, I finised my work early.
I drank with coworkers days after a long separation.
Because one of the man was on leave of absence from work, we couldn't meet with us.
I had a really good time with them.
But I was reflect that I could do something for him more.
Maybe if I could listen to his affair he might be not on leave of it.
------------------------------
2009 / 03 / 13
I went to the climbing gym.
I could climb today more than last time because my hip's hurt was getting better.
I was really happy.
I felt that health is the most important thing for human.
------------------------------
2009 / 03 / 14
I couldn't wake up early this morning.
I can have been tired, nevertheless, I went to the climbing gym.
I thought that I'm happy to go to the climbing gym.
Because I could meet to my friends whose I wanted to meet.
A Japanese famous climber Yuji made many challenges in there.
I tried some new challenges but they were so difficult for me.
After all, I couldn't do climbing at level five of challenge.
------------------------------
2009 / 03 / 15
I joined the English conversation club.
This is my sixth time joining this club.
I couldn't speak English too much.
Speaking English is more difficult than listening and writing English.
I had met a man who was good at English very well.
I'd like to see him again.
Then, I went to the climbing gym.
At last, I could climb the level five of challenge and almost yellow 11th.
I was really happy.
I went to drinking with Nobu afterword.
I had a really great day.
A thief opened his gyve by a note and killed himself by his shoelac
A thief died in the police station.
An official on behalf of the police station said to the medias that he killed himself by his shoelace after opening his gyve by a note in hand.
This news made me so happy.
I'm glad to see the official became so imaginative.
Here comes a 5 day vacation for the New Year, but I don't know what to do during these days.
Smoking
I stopped smoking two weeks ago.
I started to smoke since last year and I didn't like cigarettes so much that I thought I would stop it easily...
But I know that I need to smoke really now!
I want cigarettes more than meals.
I'm not irritable so much but I gained 6kg since then and sometimes I wanna eat foods that I don't take before.
It's a little scared.
So I'll try to find things I like more and I have to go on a diet!
Annoying Haneul.
It seems to have been very hard day today for me all day long.
It was just because I was very gloomy unconsciously.
I don't know ell the reason why I was very annyoing about everything.
Was it just because I have lots of lessons.
I got out of temper to my friends as much as I felt forry for her.
She shows me deep understanding, because we are vest friend.
Sometimes, ther are little changes for me, Today seems to be the very day.
Being the school will be off tomorrow, I'll take a rest comfortably at home.
Hey
If someone is bloating too much.
May I say, ``
1.
You are exaggerating too over.
2.
You are exaggerating too much.
3.
You are overstating.
4. what you say is exagerated.
5. what you say is overstated,
Thanks.
I am in wuhan no
it cost me 7 hours to drive from shiyan to wuhan, I am so tired, but when I think that I will see my good brother here tomorrow morning I am so happy!
I like the K-po
Hi! jejjeje... (^. ^)
I really like the k-pop, My favorites groups are ss501, Super Junior, C.
N.
Blue, 2NE1, Girl's Generation....
I try to do a paragraph in English, but it's so difficult.....
Life is ups and down.
Sometimes you feel upset.
Sometimes you feel happy.
Everyday have different feeling.
so, keep going.
haha
English party
I went to a party yesterday.
A lot of people were there to talk in English.
A Swedish man, Chinese men, a Russian woman, some people
from other countries, and many Japanese.
We had a lot of fun together.
They can speak English fluently, which made me think tha
I have to learn more.
somebody please correct this writing TT
I have decided to start a writing for Teacher's exam in the winter of nex
year.
I've heard that The United States introduced a system that rating teacher' 
ability.
what the most interesting I thought is that this system assesses teachers with students score.
I don't think students score could be the standard for estabilishment.
When we set a standard to appraise something, we should avoid being open to dispute.
We do need absolute criterion.
In my opinion teachers must be assessed by their teaching ability itself.
For example, varities of teaching methods and materials should be involved in criterion for estimation.
A plant named WARABI in Japanese is one of ferns and eatable
A fern is a unique group of plants.
A fern does not start from a seed and does not flower.
A fern begins to grow on the structure named prothallus, which is green and whose shape is similar to heart mark, and a fern will bring up through a lot of complex events.
If you want to know this complex event entirely, please check wikipedia or some books.
Unlike mosses, ferns have vascular bundles of xylems and phloems.
This is why ferns are more closely related to usual plants such as a wheat or poplar than mosses.
By the way, I'll introduce a traditional Japanese food called `` warabi `` in Japanese.
A `` warabi `` is one of ferns.
Generally speaking, a `` warabi `` is uneatable, but its young stem is eatable if you cook correctly.
A `` warabi ``'s unique taste reminds almost all Japanese of spring because a `` warabi `` is one of the spring foods.
Anemia
Today, I was diagnosed with anemia.
When I had a basis checkup-up at the company,
I was told to go to a hospital to have a check-up again.
The reault of a recheck-up was also anemia.
I have to give the iron by injection 20 times for a treatmen
as of today. (ToT)
It will be tough to me!!!
Happy New Year in 2011
Happy New Year, everyone!
How was your new year's day?
I have been staying at my parents'-in-law's house in these three days to spend our new year's days with them.
I got `` Otoshidama `` from both my husband and my parents'-in-law this morning.
After I enjoyed having `` Osechi `` with my family, I went to a temple called `` Tatebetaisha `` as `` Hatsumoude `` with my family.
I prayed our family's good luck there.
And then, I reported my new year's resolution.
My this year's resolution is here.
1.
I would love to read 48 books in English.
This year I completed 24 books in English.
So, this year I want to try to double amount of books.
I know it is very difficult because my reading level is less than other comprehension skills' level.
However, I really want to improve my reading skill.
2.
I would like to paint 10 artwork a month.
I also want to create my art blog in English and post my artwork constantly.
3.
Of course, I really would love to improve my English comprehension skills further.
I want to become able to express my thoughts, opinions and feelings with natural expressions as native English speakers do.
After I got home and checked my mails with my PC, I realized that my Michigan painting friend registered my May classes.
I am planning to go to Michigan in May to take two painting classes.
In one class I would love to learn how to paint portrait.
According to my friend's mail, my class choice was very good.
She told me that I will be able to lots of new things from two classes.
I am really looking forward to going to America again.
Before I will go there, I would like to develop my English comprehension skills further.
The first diary
Today I joined Lang-8 and this is my first English diary here.
I found this website when I read a magazine for English learners in Japan.
I still don't know how to use this website, which is very complex for me to understand the system.
But I think this system is wonderful for every language learner, so I want to learn a lot with it.
Back from NY and Boston.
Hi,
I've just come back Japan from Boston and NY.
Boston and NY was nice.
I visited several clients during the day time and we went to restaurants and bar at night.
I want to go to Boston and NY again.
hide-pierre
* * * * * * * * *
It is getting warm in Vancouver lately!
Summer is coming:) I can hardly wait!!
I want to do a hundred of things.
I also need to work, though.
I have gotten used to work ; therefore, I enjoy working much more.
It is sometimes hard because of my poor English ; however they are truly good experiences * By the way, I moved in the new house last Saturday.
Actually, this was the fifth moving...
I hope this will be my last house even though I have had bad lucks of houses.
The house is very nice because it is cute and clean!!
It used to be a garage.
The owner renovated it into a nice house.
There are a kitchen, a bathroom and two bedrooms just for my friend and I: D For now, while I am living with previous tenant, my friend is going to move in this Sunday!
I am really looking foward it.
Thesedays, I have not studied very much...
I realized that my writing skills are getting worse..
Well, I am planing to go to school in September again!!
I should keep writing someting everyday, really!!!!
I am going to come back to Japan in February.
I want to get someting much better skills before coming back to Japan..
I hope I will do my best: 
I'm going to tell my boss that I will quit:)
I got a new job, so I'm going to tell my boss that I will quit.
Yesterday I tried to tell it, but I couldn't find good timing..
I will do it on mondy for sure:)
Good luck me!!!
Director and homestay
I heve been a director of a company now.
It is going to start 1st Feb.
I must be busy, but I can not earn enough money.
I just want to consider a vision for my future.
I do not live my life with a lot of excuse.
By the way
My English friend now is staying at my house in Japan as homestay.
We have been drinking so much alcohol everyday.
He might put on weight!!
His wife might be a little bit angry when he goes back to London.
Such a great fun days.
Tiny writing
Is it correct?
My goal is becoming a veterinarian.
And I consider Basic Studies in Natural Sciences as a strong, varied science base and an international experience for admission to a vet school.
Interdisciplinarity, practical studies, wide choice of courses, experimental spirit and open-mindedness are causes why I am so enthusiastic about RU.
Death
Today my friend ` s father has died.
Our class went to see him.
Before I have seen his father once or twice, but everybody who has been on the burial has felt the devastation and so did I.
Today is a very sad day.
I got a new favorite item.
This is a pencil sharpener.
So cute!
First try.
Hello!
My name is Natasza.
I've just found this page and decided to start to write my diary here.
I've been learning English for about 9 years with 4 years of brake, but I've never had contact with people who speak English, so I think that in my future posts you will find lots of polish influence.
My idea for a life, I think, is make all dreams come true doing everything what I can at the moment.
I hate living in one place and doing thesame everyday.
My favourite subjects are maths and phisic, so probably I can have problem with connect they with traveling or something like that.
But last time I heard about charity organizations which need ingeeners and it can be a nice idea.
:)
I arrived at Singapore.
I Departed NARITA airport at 11: 30 to go to Singapore.
I spend slept and ate lunch in airplain about seven hour.
Singapore airline was find service to be Satisfactory.
I was relaxed.
but I ` m tired beacuse difference in temperature between Singapore and Japan.
I slept long time yesterday night.
Singapore during in Rainy seasons.
It was raining when I arrived at Changi airport.
I ` m looking forward to school starting =)
composition (4)
I am practicing writing the compositions to improve my writing ability for the GEPT examination.---------
If you are studying, you wouldn ` twant someone to bother you.
Last night, Jenny was studying for test.
But her neighbor, Mr.
Lin was having a party.
That maked noisy.
Jenny just called the police.
The police went to Mr.
Lin ` s home and said to him `` It is very late, don ` t make noisy. `` Finally, it was become quite, and Jenny could study.
Thank you
If I were an animal, which animal would I be?
If I were an animal, I would be cat!!
Actualy, I love cat!
They are small, cute and lovely.
When a cat say `` myao~ ``, I foll in love with the cat.
Please let me be a cat!
If I can be a cat, I will go out for a walk whole a day, sleep until I feel good, be along with people when I lonly.
Oh,,, I love a cat and I would be a cat! (*' v' *)
The Reptile Room From A Series of Unfortunate Events
I finished reading a book of the second, `` A Series of Unfortunate Events `` in English.
The book's title is `` The Reptile Room ``.
The book is my another Floridian friend's recommendation, and I am a fan of the author, `` Lemony Snicket ``.
That is because I think that his books have not been translated into Japanese yet.
So, if I would love to read his books, I definitely have to read his books in English.
I love reading such kinds of books.
The book series has thirteen episodes, so I really would love to conquer all of them.
However, I can not keep a motivation about reading.
That is my weakness.
Meanwhile, in the second book the orphan siblings straggled against their enemy, Count Olaf again.
Compared to first book, second one is more complicated.
I enjoyed reading it much more.
I guess in all series, the youngstarts will straggle their enemy, and in the last book they will win.
Since the book series are for children, it is easy for me to guess the story lines.
Right now I am reading another type of book.
I would love to finish reading it in this three days.
Graviation
Something came down from the sky.
As soon as I saw that, I found it was a walnut.
And it was devided and rolled on the load.
Suddenly something had been flying for the walnut.
And I noticed that this crow dropped the walnut from his beak to ground in oder to break that shell.
How clever!!
The crow must understand the exist of gravity which we havn't understand yet.
On my busy days, It was a time I felt happy.
A summer col
Nowadays whether is so hot!
Outside is like a steamer and inside is very cold because of the airconditioner.
Maybe you think I make absurd remarks, but Im sick and tired of a
airconditioner.
I hate its winds.
When season summer, I am certainly catch a summercold.
How ridiculous it is!!
I think we should economize energy.
Turn on an air conditioner in moderation is a best way we can.
Gran Torino
Recently, I watched' Gran Torino' directed and starred by Clint Eastwood on TV.
It was a great film.
I think this film is one of the best films of Clint Eastwood.
In the beginning of this summer, I met his son, Kyle Eastwood, in the big book shop in Paris.
There was a kind of lecture about his music career.
He played the contrabass and the guiter.
His music is played in the end of Gran Trino.
He was very nice guy and handsome.
Hello world!
Hi everyone...!
My name is Martina, I'm 19 years old and Italian.
I found out about this website yesterday, and this is my very first entry journal here.
I am at my first year of university and I'm currently studying English and Japanese as main subjects.
I've always loved learning new languages, and these are the ones that I definitely like the most.
I actually think I'm in love with English and everything related to it since I first started studiying it in Elementary school...
I really enjoy learning new words ad expressions, and when I don't know the right way to say something or the right word for something you'll literally see me running towards the dictionary and grabbing it as soon as I can!
yes, sometimes I'm quite obsessed ahaha.
As far as Japanese is concerned, It's always attracted me in a way and so, since my town has one of the best language insitutes in Italy (can you say that about a university? I don't know..) I've decided to study this charming language.
I'm going to try and write also in Japanese, although my vocabulary and grammar are obviously very poor at the moment. = P
Well, I hope to meet new people and I can't wait to learn many new things and get many corrections in order to improve my English (and my Japanese, too!).
See you soon! = D
CHANGE
Today, I get up early because I decide to change myself.
Since the summer vacantion start, I always stay up to play computer game and even get up until AM13: 00.
Besides, little exercise make me gain fat, so I want go gym and go on a diet.
Do you know your enemy?
This title comes from my favorite song sung by Green day, one of US band.
As they said, It's essential for you to know your enemy which makes you in a trouble.
As for me, Today's my enemy is untidy fat around my stomach!
Few weeks ago, I went to Australia for sightseeing.
( I'll also write this episode soon)
The travel was very enjoyable, but I ate high-calorie meals many times during my trip.
( In particular, on the plane for Australia flight crews kindly served me with meals five times)
After I came back to Japan, my weight increased by more three kg before I left for.
And I haven't change troublesome part of my body yet.
Recently I read a book about body control.
It emphasized it's important that the calorie you consume must be high or equivalent against that you take in.
That's why I decided to eat low-calorie foods and to go jogging everyday.
Then there're good thing and bad thing.
The former is that Japan has a lot of low-calorie and delicious foods like udon or buckwheat.
The latter is that going outside in winter is reluctant behavior as much as possible!
How to create English friend?
I'm looking for a friend who is native English Speaker.
Because I'd like to my English skill up.
I was recommended to go to bar of pub where foreign people go to.
However I don't have much courage to go to pub and talk to unknown person with my cheap English.
Using Lang8 may be a way to make a friend.
Please Let me know.
I can help Studying Japanese instead of learning English.
chatting with friends
I had school for five days until today, and it finished, so I can enjoy chatting with friends I met on this web site.
Even if I had school the next day I chatted, but I was a little sleepy at school the next day, so I decided to sleep longer.
Six days ago, I took a long nap for about five hours and sat up late.
When I was enjoying chatting at about 3-ish, I considered if I should go to bed, but I thought if I went to bed once I wouldn't be able to wake up at 6 and continued chatting till I went to school.
I was a bit sleepy at school, so I decided not to do the same things again.
From today, I'm free and can enjoy chatting at night!
Japanese business man
Almost all japanese business man use train.
Some of them see mobile pages, and read some books, the other sleep in the train.
Sometimes they who are seated on chair lean against me.
It's weighty.
I think they are very tired at their office, because of their a lot of hard work.
So they want to sleep more long time as possible as they can.
But I don' tlike to be weighed.
And if they are drunk, it's the worst situation.
Today people next to me is so.
I was very tired, while moving to my school.
First Diary
I'm Japanese woman.
I want to express my thought in English.
I decided that this year, I write diary every day, and I'll be checked my English someone on Lang-8 on internet.
I want to go to England to see my friend.
She is Japanese, and works nanny in England.
So, I want to speak English.
Plant a young tree
Yesterday father and I planted a young trees.
We went to the shop, where we bought some trees.
They are five kind of trees which are about one or two-year old.
They're maples, vines, and some korean native kind of trees.
Before we go to our garden to plant, we went to a restaurant for lunch.
Then we met my eldest sister couple by chance in the restaurant.
My broter-in-low who's name is Mr.
park, joined.
And we plantde trees and clean the garden.
It taked about two hours to finish.
I thought we couldn't plant trees in a day without his help.
I was lucky yesterday!
First Day in Lang-8
Yesterday, a friend of mine recommended me this website.
So I registered and logged in.
To a new comer like me, it is a really very interesting and useful website.
I feel very regretful to have missed it in the past.
I find what most appeals to me is that one can improve his or her ability in a foreign language while make new friends from all over the world.
That is fascinating!
UP
`` UP `` is a very famous movie in Taiwan.
We need to put on 3D glasses to see this movie.
Disney cartoon was very funny and made us amazing.
My mom, younger sister and I decided ti go to see the movie this morning.
The tickets is expensive because we need put on the glasses to see the movie.
I love Disney's movie.
hot spring
I went a hot spring today.
It occurred to me that Japanese doesn't hesitate to take a bath with others is but shy to talk with foreigners.
Maybe Japanese is never thinking if we make a mistake without talking with.
I think that's why Japanese is shy.
How do you think about this?
Rikako
Go to U.
S.
A
An annual meeting of society for neuroscience will be held from the next Saturday to Wednesday at Chicago.
To attend the meeting, I'll go to Chicago.
This is the first time to go U.
S.
A for me.
And I haven't use international flight alone.
I know almost nothing about international travel!
And sometime people says `` U.
S.
A is dangerous! ``
So, I'm really anxious about this travel.
But, of course, I expect to have a good time.
I hope this trip is fun.
This is a good chance for me.
I'll enjoy Chicago!
I love reading!
I love reading.
I always carry a paperback and read it while I am commuting or when I am free at school.
Today I bought a book written by Morimi Tomihiko at the bookstore in my college, where all the college students and teachers can buy books at a five persent discount off the regular price.
( The bookstore is called' Seikyou' in Japanese.
Most of the Japanese colleges have such bookstores.) The title of the book was' Kitsune No Hanashi.' (' Kitsune No Hanashi' means' A story about a fox.') I found that the story was very mysterious.
I don't think Morimi Tomihiko is common all over the world, so let me explain who he is.
Morimi Tomihiko is a Japanese novelist.
He graduated from Kyoto University with a major in agriculture.
Now he lives in Kyoto and the settings of most of his novels are Kyoto.
Though many of the main characters in his novels are dull college students, his literary style is very colorful and sophisticated!
Most of his stories can be categorized as magical realism fiction.
In Japan, his books are very popular among young people, especially among college students.
Whenever I read his books, I am fascinated with his wonderful literary style.
Futhermore, his story is very enjoyable.
The characters in his stories are somehow likeable.
Anyway, I am fond of the books written by Morimi Tomihiko.
But I'm afraid his books are very difficult to translate into another language.
In fact, all his books are remained to be translated into foreign languages.
I'm going to finis reading' Kitsune No Hanashi' today.
, After that, I have to concentrate on the preparation for the STEP test on the next Sunday!
I'm a little nervous.
I'm Reading Excel Binaries
Because I want draw CHARTS in excel by python, I'm reading microsoft excel binaries.
Its format is so complex:-(
Excel binary format is known as `` Compound Document ``.
It is sequences of 512 bytes blocks (= `` sector ``).
The first sector is `` header sector `` that indicates `` dictionary sector ``, and data structure like FAT (file allocation table) in FAT16 / 32 filesystem.
The directory sector points head of `` Stream ``.
sequences by some sectors made byte stream.
The byte stream is sequences of BIFF Records.
Busyyyyy
I couldn't write my diary last week because I was busy and tired for my part-time job.
I hadn't ever had exprerience of a hall stuff member, so I always be tensed up during working.
Recently, I feel a little relax that I got accustomed to working as a hall stuff member.
Today is the most busy day in my experience days.
I can not only having a break but drinking a glass of water.
I was really thirsty and tired.
After working, I drank water soon and went back my house to eat something.
I went to bed after eating soon.
Tomorrow, I have a work as a hall stuff member but I have a holiday day after tommorrow, so I can stand it.
See ya tomorrow.
What is Bush's advantage?
The US president Bush will finish his term soon.
In my opinion, I've always thought he is really incapable and dull.
As you know, an Iraqi reporter threw his shoes at Bush at a press interview in Baghdad.
That scene was aired on TV repeatedly.
study
Next month, I will go to a collage.
I don't know what to do, so I am not studying at all.
I become foolish.
THE TENNIS
I have been belong to tennis club.
I usually play tennis six times in a week.
I can't play tennis well.
But I like to play tennis.
I want to be a good tennis player.
Bakery Day
Today, I bought two bread at my favorite bakery.
The back one is I have forgotten seeing the name tag of it.
It was a sandwich.
The front is a small bun with cream cheese and walnut.
The sandowich costs 280yen and I ate first time.
My coworker told me it is great!
Indeed, it was yummy.
This is a french bread with cheese, maybe raw ham with spice and lettuce.
Maybe I can't get raw ham at ordinaly stores.
It tastes high-grade hum!
But the bread was a little of hard, I am aching my chin a little now.
Holiday
Today is monday, I just finished my holiday and back from my hometown.
Now, I'm working in my company, I feel a little tired, maybe I enjoyed to much in this holiday, so I can't acclimatize myself to different place or pepole etc.
I think a few days later I can get right.
So bad
Recently, I feel it's to bad.
when I do anything I always will meet troule.
that's make me feel to bad.
I think I need a big relax to help me fix this question.
So I will do more exercise to relax myself.
I think I can make this question go away.
Christmas present
I was on day duty today.
I dropped in a department store at Nihombashi on my way to come back home.
The purpose was to buy a Christmas present.
After four days, I will do a Christmas party.
I will exchange my friends to presents gathered by us.
It costs about 1000 Yen per one.
I was at a loss for a while, but I bought shoes-keeper involved in deodorizers.
I hope my friends will be pleased with my present.
Draft summary of a writing assigment (1)
This may be boring to those who do not like technical topics:)
-------
English pronounceatio
I have worked for an American company for 4years.
All of my colleague are bilinguals.
Ofcource each English levels are different but my company requires at least 730 toeic point.
Therefore, our employees English level is higher than other Japanese companies.
Other countries, for exapmle Germany, most of business people can speak English rather than Japanese.
Hence, 730 toeic points are common for them.
But the accent of English is not associated with Toeic score.
Even if people who have 900 toeic score, their pronunciation is not good.
I found this fact when I jumped in this company.
A woman colleague can write English e-mail very well but her speaking has very strong Japanese accent.
This trend is vice versa.
It's difficult for us to improve the pronunciation only by reading or writing foreign language.
If you want to improve it, you should practice vowel and consonant sounds.
For instance, F sounds is completely different between American and Japanese.
For American, Japanese `` Futon `` is a misterious sound because shape of mouse for `` Fu `` is different between American and Japanese.
My first diary
now, very late time.....
I'm happy that I know this site.
I'm not english very well, but I really want fluent english skill.
I want talk about many story but it's difficult....
please help me:)
my university homework is very hard.
English class is best of best hardship.
I can't understand that my english professsor's lecture....
New York
Help me!
in and at are used even if I show a place and do not understand it how I should have had a good command of it.
I am glad when I get some clear answer.
it was reiny today.
nice to meet you!!
my name is misaki:)
I went to school to take a test today.
it was very difficlut!!!!
The test that the test writes a character beautifully.
The end of the rainy season
It is very shiny sunny and dizzily hot today.
Please take care not to get dehydrated or not to suffer heat stroke.
You had better not to exposed the sun shine and heat for very long time.
Enough water and electrolytes help you from heat attack.
Salt will help you, too.
Cool your body and head and hydrate well, or you may suffer heat stroke.
Take good care and enjoy summer as well as possible.
Enough to turn off even a love that lasted a 100 years?
It's quite comfortable because my feet don't get sweaty.
When my mom was wearing five-finger socks, dad said that it was enough to turn off even a love that lasted a 100 years (a Japanese proverb).
In addition, my husband agreed with him! ``.
Enough to turn off the love?
You will like it!
Something fun!
My friend Philipp and I went to office this morning by bus.
He had to call one guy who would hand a key over to him.
The one was entrusted by Philipp's German friend.
Philipp's English is not as good as his German.
After two or three sentences,' Do you speak Chinese?
' he asked.
Home Town
I'm going to visit my parents next month.
5 / 8 is Mother's day.
What should I give my mother for Mother's day?
I start English tweet.
I signed up new twitter account for learning English yesterday.
I'm going to tweet daily life, family, sports, my job and more in English.
I'd like to communicate with foreign people.
My twitter account: Takessy _ en (URL
( I put the picture in my profile.
It was effected by `` befunky [ URL ].
Is it funny?)
Steven Jobs
No one person has received more praise and abuse than Steven Jobs, who is the CEO of APPLE & PIXAR corporation, as well as has being cover person over 200 famous magazines.
I was astonished by Jobs's lecture spoken in Stanford University in 2005, which including three stories, and tell us should follow our heart to find our goals.
The first story is connecting dots.
Although his parents eagerly wanted him to enter a University, but when he really became a freshman, Jobs lost himself.
He didn't know what's the meaning of continuing his study in a college which fees is so expensive that cost most parts of his parents' money.
So he decided to drop out.
Instead of this, Jobs started to drop in the calligraphy class in his college, which supplied the one of best calligraphy training in the whole country.
Until did he creat the first APPLE computer, all the effects what he had done before came back.
Only did you trust something what followed your heart as well as work hard, one day when you looking back, you can clearly know the secrets of these dots you have done.
The second story is about love and loss.
He was expeled on the grant scale from APPLE, which company was created himself.
Nevertheless, he said that he has been reject, but he still love.
Dramatically, these striking things let him found his dreamboat, established a new company: NEXT, purchased PLXAR and became the CEO of APPLE again.
According this story, I was inspired by his courage to start over.
So don't settled, keep looking your love.
The third story is about death.
He has been diagnosed with cancer.
Jobs described the situation of the examination.
He survived luckily.
And then he learnt stay hungry, stay foolish and facing everyday with an utter innocence.
I've got to keep up with the time.
Well...
now I'm finally writing my journal....!
But it is a fact that I hadn't been writing journals.
To be honest, there are two reasons...
First, when I wanted to write it, something was wrong with my PC!
So, I couldn't do it.
To make matters worse, there were no time left for me.
Second, I was too exhausted to do it.
Thanks to the job, I already earned around $ 240 for 4 days.
In fact, I did it too today.
Anyway, I'll write about it in detail sometime.
I said that I earn enough money on my own to study abroad at the Australia, but this job is a little hard.
That's because it is boring.
I'm already tired of giving out leaflets.
LOL In addition, when I do it, I am avoided by people in most case....
: (
Thanks for reading!
If you have time, please correct my poor sentences! ;)
I'm home!
I went back home from USA yesterday.
I realized many differences between Japan the US during my 3 weeks stay in the East Coast.
Firstly, there are few convenience stores in the US.
In Japan, I can find convenience stores when I get hungry, but I couldn't in the US.
Secondly, streets in the US are designed in grid style, and each streets have theirs own names.
For instance, the names of the streets are numbers (like `` E 32 Street ``, `` 5th avenue ``) in New York.
It is easy to read maps.
In Japan, I often lose my way because the streets are very complex and narrow and there are a lot of streets which have no name.
Visiting foreign countries enables us to see our countries from other viewpoints.
First!!!