Good luck on your new start!
My teacher is going to move to change his job.
He is a so nice guy and taught me English very kindly and was willing to accept my getting off the track.
And he took in my favorite subjects like soccer.
Actually, he was the one who let me know about Lang-8..
He is also good at Japanese and studies' Kanji'.
His Kanji ability is much better than mine.
We've known each other for only half a year, but his lessons were a lot of fun.
I'm going to miss him but I really wish him the best of luck with his new life.
I'm looking forward to seeing him again through here.
Good words
I heard a sentence last night when I was watching TV.
It reminds and inspires me a lot.
Your life is like when you walk.
When you go downhill, you have to stick out your chest or you will fall down.
When you go uphill, you have to bend your back.
It is like when you are confronted with frustration and you have to keep your confidence.
When everything is going smoothly, you have to be more modest.
It is really good for me.
Arrangements
It's summer.
The session is passed, and I work as apprentice at the souvenir shop.
When I was at school, we painted a lot of wooden handywork, like small plates and cases.
Making souvenirs is a hard but interesting work.
On the one hand you need to be attentive and neat, but on the other hand you should set all your imagination and inspiration in motion.
Maybe, in this August my mom and I will visit Norway, Sweden and Finland.
I like Finland.
When my family used to go there very frequently (about 3 or 4 times a month), I had a nice time.
I will never forget my first time at customs.
I suppose, I was 7 (nice age, you don't need to think about serious things and can do what you want).
We drove at our heavy truck to border, there was a long queue, we were waiting.
iFinally my mother took me to the customs window, and gave a passport to the man...
and when we were going to sit in a truck, frightened man suddenly said `` lapsi! ``.
Mom stared at him and raised me up to show him: D That's my first memory about this country.
The second memory is the toys, which I was given near the border.
There are two balls: one with a cat inside, the other with dog.
You know, you can (win?) them at a slot machine.
So that's the second.
The third memory is the house where we lived.
It was situated near Helsinki, a big and light house with e a small lake behind it. It was winter, so it was frozen.
The rooms were big enough, but not so big.
There were few furnitures.
And one of this I liked the most is a big white fridge.
I don't know why.
I liked Finland in the Winter.
And I hope I'll like Finland in the Summer.
By the way, today I went to guitar teacher, and the only thing he said after `` Show me what you can! `` was `` What do you want?
You play really well, you level skills are higher than just amateur.
Just start improvising! `` To tell the truth, I myself didn't expect
And why I didn't play that good at the audition?...
Well, I just proud of myself, yep.
:)
And, by the way, `` white nights `` have already come.
And now they disturb me.
If only I had dense black curtains.
Whitney Houston Failed
A couple of weeks ago, I heard a new Whitney Houston tune / song on my car radio.
It sounded not bad.
I had been wondering what she was / has been doing.
And finally, she released a new song!
She came back!
Today, I read an article on the net about her comeback performance in New York's Central Park.
It said that it was disappointing.
Her voice was hoarse and cracked.
Oh, My God!
What a shock!
Her recent picture was not like her before.
Old and not beautiful..... (wwwww)
What happened to her?
I know about her tumultuous marriage with Bobby Brown and an arduous battle with her drug addiction.
she still hasn't recovered from them?
She had a incredible beautiful high voice.
She was decent, not like Mariah Carey.
However, she is already 46!
More disappointing to me is she said the reason for her bad voice that day? was because she talked with Oprah Winfrey too much on her show.
That might be one of the reasons, however, to me it just sounds like an excuse.
I believe she can sing.
I hope she would come back to the scene as a diva again, even not like her heyday.
First entry
I think this web site is a cool idea.
People help each other learning their languages.
Let me write something and see if anyone can review it and give me some advice.
I just installed Fallout 3 and played a bit last night.
I would say after 10 years of waiting, it has not failed its title, at least not from my first impression.
A lot of good features are inherited from old Fallout series, like the SPECIAL system, always having good, bad, neutral and (my favorite) sarcasm options when talking with NPCs.
I'm not sure about keeping the action points feature though.
Anyway, I think I'll spend quite some time playing it in the next few weeks.
It's too hot.
It's too hot in Japan.
On the way I got a headache.
It's not a joke.
If my sentences aren't practical, please correct them.
A nice surpise
This morning I found out that one of my favourite bands released a new album.
I already forgot about Rise Against and it is a great surprise for me, because I haven't listened to them for 2 years.
I hope this band didn't become worse, like many others big ones did, and I'll enjoy listening to it.
Well, I just have to get it and check it out.
My mum is a great cook!
Hi everyone,
I just realised I am so lucky!!!
Why?
It's because my mum is probably the best cook I have ever met in my life.
Cooking is not her profession ; but rather, she is a housewife.
I have eaten at hotels and have had expensive meals but they are nothing like what she cooks.
A friend once told me that the reason why I love her cooking is because she's my mum but that is not the reason.
Being a housewife is really tough.
I would rather be working outside than be a housewife.
So I must appreciate my mum and help her ^ ^
no title, haha
I don't really like cockroaches...
I haven't seen cockroaches since I came here.
I think it's been about one and half years now.
I tried to fight against him, but he didn't show up.
I should have exploded the whole building so I can destroy~ them!!!
Oh, I remembered.
I had to write about counseling.
I'm gon na do it next time!
bye!
Nice to meet you.
This is my first time writing a diary on the internet.
I hope someone will see my diary and correct it.
I watched a DVD of `` Grey's anatomy `` today.
Actually I watch it a lot these days.
I'm so into it.
I watched season 2 today.
So there is a lot to see.
I don't know all the medical words in English.
So I have to check dictionary all the time.
But I can study English with it.
And I think it's fun, right? (YEAH!)
Thank you for reading this.
Fruit
I ate a Chinese citron now.
I love citrus fruits.
I'm eating a banana every day for my health.
Bananas gives me energy.
My dog!
I have to make a newspaper in English as my summer vacation homework and I decided to introduce about my dog in the newspaper.
So, please somebody correct my English!
I will introduce my dog, Tiara.
She is a cheerful and plump pretty dog, perhaps she is the cutest dog in the world.
She's an 8 year old golden retriever
Her fur is a beautiful amber colour and is soft.
She is a little stupid, but has perceptive insights about food because she is always famished ^ ^ She loves food!
When she has had her food, she always prances around the living room merrily.
And she loves basking too.
She usually lays down near the big window and basks in the morning sun.
When she is basking she looks very content.
RAIN
It is raining in Tokyo.
It has not been rainy for a week,
it makes me happy.
Usually, rain makes me unhappy,
However, I hoped it would rain today because it is too hot.
Anyway, today will be good day.
thank you for reading.
A New Hair Style of the Wang
I saw a news article on Yahoo yesterday.
It reported that Chien-Ming Wang cut his hair and has a new hair style.
Here is the link:
URL
My English translation of the title is `` Wang changed a new hair style, but Jeter sucks it `` As long as you are a Chinese, nine out of ten you will think that Wang matched the new style very much, and that his new style is very handsome.
However, the news mentioned that Derek Jeter think his hair was really a damn.
The different values about handsome among cultures are very interesting.
I have seen an article on TIME.
It talked about there being a big difference about different values of a handsome man between Western countries and Eastern countries.
It mentioned many examples of Japanese men, Korean men, and Hong Kong men.
They paid much attention to their faces and spent lots of money to shop.
But in Western countries, the standard of a handsome man depends not on their faces, but on their masculine symbols, like muscle and behavior.
I started to notice the ways of foreign clothing and hair styles these past days by watching TV programs, such as Friends, Scrubs, etc.
I found out that the clothing and the hair styles was very different.
About clothing, the western men dressed mostly very simple, and about hair, most of them don't have a fringe at all and their backhair were short that no hair cover necks.
If they had a long hair, it would be really long and thick.
By contrast, men in eastern countries dress up more.
Apart from a shirt and jeans, we usually wear an accessory.
As to hair, men usually have medium hair, neither very short or long.
If we want to cut our hair short, we must leave some hair on the back of neck in order to avoid looking like a nerd.
If we want to have a long hair style, mostly it will be light and especailly long on a fringe or backhair.
Oh my god.
I make a long entry again.
It almost cost me a whole morning.
I have to watch the NBA's final game 3.
Hope you will not feel bored about this diary and help me for correcting it.
I like you give me any comments and opinions too.
I would really like to discuss.
My son has diarrhea
When I came back home from work today, my son had diarrhea.
My son have diarrea.
It was like water and his bottom was red.
We were planning to go to my hometown tomorrow.
We were all ready to go.
But we had to cancel the trip.
What a pity!
But there's no way we can go.
Listening to music
I am listening to music on the commuter train.
Today, I listen the music, it feels like I am in a cafe.
For example, `` Lovi' n you. ``
I want to speak English.
So, I listen the English song.
Come fast next season!
I don ` t like winter.
It is very cold.
I like the warm season.
So, I like spring.
Spring is a very exciting season.
New life, New meets (friends), New meets (oneself)
In Japan, the new school and work year starts in spring.
I hope to become qualified in English.
I hope to get a new promotion.
But that isn ` t postopned.
Everyday, there are new things to try.
Self-introduction
Hello everyone!!
I'm Gen-Mai.
Gen-Mai means unpolished rice in Japanese.
I'm called Gen-Mai by my friends sometimes.
... No, very frequently.
Starting today, I'm going to try write a diary everyday!!
Today has nothing specal to write!!
See you tomorrow!!
Bye!
Hello!
until yesterday I was very busy so I didn't watch dvds.
I hooked on the American dvds.
The title is `` closer ``.
Before that I hooked on `` Alias ``.
Jennifer Garner is attractive women so when I watched making scene, I felt drawn toward her.
I think Amercan drama is a good study but this drama is very difficult.
Doing for relaxation
I got a foot masssage today.
It's a kind of Tai-wan style massage.
I loved the massage shop where I went because the staff of the shop explained what is wrong in my body.
They said I'm cold-natured and have poor blood flow.
In addition, the staff said correctly that I had problems with my lower back and my neck.
I was surprized at finding my health condition from my foot.
After that, I went to a fitness club which has bedrock bathing.
I felt relaxed to take a bedrock bath ^ ^
... but now I'm very sleepy... zzz
cow tongue
I went to Sendai as a business trip today.
The special product of Sendai is a cow's tongue.
I bought it and ate it at home.
It was very delicious.
I want to eat this cow's tongue again.
wake up!
I was woken up by my daughter today.
My daughter / She was woken up by my wife.
Who woke her up?
The wife was woken up by my stertor / snoring.
hahaha.
BBQ
Tomorrow I'm going for BBQ (I'm sure this expression is wrong, but I don't know how to say it ^ ^ ;) in the river.
BUT!
Where to hold it and when we should leave has not been decided yet!
( I know that a long subject is not good in English, but how can I rewrite this?)
Can you believe it??
This time we leave everything to my friend, but I'm kinda person who don't feel at ease unless everything is perfect.
So, even now I feel nervous, wondering if it's really going to be held.
Am I busy?
I am a person who enjoys her own leisure time.
And I want to live my life at my own pace.
Sleeping as long as I want everyday.
But I found it hard to achieve recently.
Because when I've finished my classes, homework or jobs etc...
It's nearly 10 pm when I get back home.
And after I take a bath, brush my teeth, chat with my friends etc...
It's nearly 12 pm.
Afterall, I want to at least healthly sleep before 12 pm.
QQ
tears.....
I've been suffering many unhappy things these days.
Maybe things aren't so bad own their own, but I really can't handle them when they occur together....
English is one of my biggest problems.
I don't know how to master this language...
Though I spend most of my time and energy in learning English, it's become apparent that I've hardly made any improvement.
I don't know why it's so hard for me to learn English!!!
Today,..
I went to take the business English correspondence class as usual.. but this time...
our teacher said something to me that made my heart break..
I had never known my English was poor until the teacher told me that my English sounded illogical....
I didn't know how I felt at that moment..
but I did know my eyes were wet..
and the tears nearly fell from my face..
Summer Holiday
I had a long breaktime.
I should study again.
It's so cute.
Hello everyone.
I got up at 6: 30am in Japan.
I found a very cute movie.
URL
It's so cute!
One
Hello! Nice to meet you! My name is Ailsa.
I joke name.
I am twenty-three years old.
I hope to make many friends on lang-8.
Thank you everyone!
Electioneering
Elections will be held on August 30th.
The Mayer is supporting Hamada for the minister of defense.
Mr.
Hamada belong's to the Liberal Democratic Party.
This time they may lose administration.
The Democratic Party has more supporters than they do.
The Mayer is busy with the election campaign as well as his own work.
I'm going to helping him with his work as his secretary.
Today
I went to a Kanazawa University festival with my American friend.
It was fun.
I made a good friend with a Vietnamese.
We ate Ikayaki and Omurice there.
They were good.
After that we wemt for a drive to enjoy the autumn colors.
We enjoyed it very much.
And we had dinner with my other friends.
We ate pizza and pasta.
We talked with each other and enjoyed our meals.
. Today was an amazing day.
A bear at the washbowl
There is a bear at the washbowl in my house.
Of course, it isn't a real bear.
It is made of sponge:) It is cute.
It waits at all times to clean the washbowl.
Yesterday, I learned that John Galliano was tried when I watched CNN news.
I was so surprised and sad.
I thought he was a wonderful designer, but he got into trouble.
I'm going to study abroad in America.
However I have two worries.
One of them is that my English is still very clumsy.
Anyway, I'm studying English at the TOEFL Institute these days.
Berklee don't requires a TOEFL score.
I'm just attending the Institute to improve my English because I'll have to take many classes in English.
I have a lot of assignments everyday.
Self-Introduction
Hello!
I live in Okinawa, the southwestern part of Japan.
I work for the Japan air self defense force.
I'm learning English, but it's really difficult for me!
I want to get friends here and have my compositions corrected.
Thank you.
Irregular heartbeat
Several days ago, I had an irregular heartbeat for the first time in my life!
It was like this ; I suddenly started to feel some sort of of discomfort around my heart.
Then I checked my pulse and found that there was a missing beat at intervals.
I was very scared because I had been very healthy so far.
I thought, `` It's so terrible!
I'm still in my 20's.
Do I have to live with it for the rest of my life? ``
Then I went to the hospital and took an ECG.
The doctor told me that I did occasionally have an irregular pulse but it was not a fatal one.
He added that it could get worse due to stress and fatigue, and he just advised me to take as much rest as needed.
I was relieved to hear the doctor's diagnosis, but I'm still worried.
I didn't know that stress could induce an irregular heartbeat of a healthy young lady like me!
As the old saying goes, all illness comes from the mind.
How to write a reseach proposal?
I think that may be a common question for those students who want to pursue higher education.
We seldom research something.
What Chinese universities offer their students is mostly coursework based curriculum.
The show of our lives must go on, so does the application.
I've summed up some points which I think are important and useful.
1.
You can count on Google as your best friend, adviser and an almost infinite resource of academic papers.
Many of them you can download as a pdf copy, or if you can't download a paper from the links scholar. google. com offers you, go directly to the author's website, many authors enjoy their paper to be seen and cited by readers.
2.
A good review is the best starting point.
And then you can trace the author, or the paper cited, to do a more in depth research into your area of interest.
3.
The correct balance of width and depth of your reading is essential.
Both ways have their merits and disadvantages.
4.
Innovative and original ideas are good, but if you can not find them, you should know that most of research work is just refinement of other's work.
A practical plan and reasonable analysis is also worth a lot.
Vessel
I'll spend the next few weeks / the coming weeks on board the `` Justo Sierra `` vessel carrying out some geophysical research and learning.
I'm sure it's going to be a terrific experience.
I need to study!
Please correct my English sentences! (20090108)
The thing that I want to do in January 2009 is to put in more effort in studying English and keep on writing sentences in English everyday here in Lang-8!
Thanks a lot!
USJ
I went to USJ yesterday with my friend.
It was so cold that I could not stop shivering.
However there were not so many people there, so we didn't need to wait our turn outside.
My friend worked part-time at USJ.
It looked like she was really having a great time!
So I wanted to work part-time at USJ, too.
I will go to Tokyo Disney Land in February.
I am really looking forward to it:)
It will be very cold.
So I must ptotect myself against the coldX (
I want to go to Walt Disney World someday!!!
Manga in English
Diagnosed with being easily impressed.
Today, I was reviewing my previous entries and my comments.
I realized that I'm the kind of person who is easily impressed.
I find lots of things fascinating.
I'm moved by very simple things that other people might not even have a second look at.
For instance, I started watching some Indian movies about a month ago.
I have some friends who are crazy about this genre.
I, on the other hand, didn't have much time to watch any.
When I had the time, though, I bought about six Indian movies to watch.
The first movie I watched made me cry for two hours like a five-year-old who lost her doll.
You think the second one was different?
Not at all.
The six movies have the same basic idea.
Actually all Indian movies have the same basic idea.
However, I continued crying during the rest of the five films and each one of them impressed me even more.
Indian movies are like clay that can be molded into many different shapes while still remaining clay.
The shape is what impresses me, and not the clay itself.
This concept might be a bit ambiguous for those who haven't been in such a situation.
So, how bad is it?
Still...
I still have got a cold.
I took some medicine, so I feel better for now.
sorry, that's all for today.
Have a nice day:)
`` 450 times ``
This is my 450th diary.
I started keeping a diary around 2008.
Thanks to the people all over the world, I'm having a fun and solid time.
Changing the subject, but I got a call from my friend yesterday.
She said `` I want to cancel the New York trip.
I was somewhat puzzled what to say.
Hi!
Hello! My name is Ken.
I just started studying English.
However, it is terribly difficult.
I want to study more and to make a lot of friends.
The first Man in Rome
I am going to talk about the historical novel called `` The First Man in Rome `` by Colleen McCullough, who is a british woman writter.
The novel is about an important Roman politican called / named Gaius Marius.
He is the main character, although others like Cornelius Silla, Metelus, and Caesar's grandfather also appear.
Marius didn't come from an important family, but he became a consul because he was a clever and popular general in the Roman army.
So, after he was made consul by the Romans, he went to Africa, where he fought against Yugurta, who was king of Numidia.
Marius had to fight other tribes in the north of Italy, until 100 B.
C.
He had to step down from power because he got sick.
hi
I went to school.
By the way, do you like to study?
I play basketball after school.
I think basketball play everyone.
Because one for all all for one.
super-flu
I've just received an international call on my cellphone.
I was wondering if it was from one of my friends.
But it was from Korea's quarantine depot,
they're conducting follow-up of super-flu for entry to Korea recently.
They asked me if we have fever and cold symptoms.
We don't have these symptoms right now.
If it helps, this picture is the information they gave us at Japan's quarantine depot when we returned to Japan.
D:
hey hey you you!!
lets hang out in tokyo~ haha~ xD
im free until next month.
kinda lucky but not for me. being bored sucks.
I don't like it.
An abstract concept of hapiness
Although most people think about what happiness is like, most people never doubt that there is happiness somewhere in a human's life.
A famous man, I heard, said in the past that the worst thing for you is to be born in the world.
According to this, human's life can be said to be leisure time to the end.
Do you think there are like happiness in reality??
Please correct these sentences!
Sorry for a little academic.
I am just writing about the parents' attitude when their children complain about chronic abdominal pain.
Is the below one OK?
-------
Trained parents who show distraction produces fewer childrens' chronic functional abdominal symptoms than parents who show attention.
Let me introduce myself
Hello everyone,
I'm Makitys.
This is just my nickname.
I was born and grew up in Tokyo.
I studied at a university in Tokyo.
I received a bachelor's degree in applied physics and electronics.
After graduated from the university, I got a job as an engineer.
I changed jobs a few times but always kept the same type of job as an engineer.
I currently work for an electronics maker in Japan as an engineer.
I'm a single woman and live by myself.
My parents, brother, and sister live in Tokyo.
I moved to Fukuoka from Yokohama for business this January.
Fukuoka is located the northern part of Kyushu,
which is a part of the Japanese Archipelago.
( see the map I've attached)
Fukuoka city is the biggest city in Kyushu.
Compared with Tokyo, Fukuoka is a compact but very comfortable city.
Commodity prices here are lower than those in Tokyo, and Fukuoka Airport is very near central Fukuoka.
Narita Airport is far from central Tokyo.
It takes one hour from the airport to central Tokyo even if you take an expensive superexpress.
Moreover, Tokyo is a very crowded city.
One thing I do not like about living here is that I'm separated from my family.
It costs a lot of money to go see my parents from here.
I miss my family and relatives who live in Tokyo.
If you come to Fukuoka, please let me know!
An English lesson for Halloween
I'm an elementary school teacher, as you might know.
Yesterday, I made an English lesson with ALT, which is an acronym for Assistant Language Teacher.
The topic of the lesson was Halloween.
The students need to answer questions about Halloween that I've prepared by playing Bingo.
After the class, I asked the students to fill out a questionnaire.
I was very glad to find [ that ] they liked the lesson.
[ Diary ] 14 / 8 / 10 of Event
It is It's been cloudy or and rainy recently.
Although my school was no lecture doesn't have a lecture, I got up early in the morning today.
I ate a piece of toast putting butter and cinnamon sugar and went to a coin laundry near my house to wash my clothes because I do not have clothes washer in my house.
It cost six dollars to washing for the laundry and cost six dollars to for the dryer.
When I washing ended, it was evening. Laundry ended till evening.
I went to the cake shop in the city that my friend introduced to has been telling me and it has a as nice taste and famous.
The shop of inner decorating decors was green.
After I came went back home, I cooked dinner, and the food for dinner was were prawns & avocado salad, roast chicken and OTAMA SAN GOHAN.
First, I cut the lettuce, cut coarsely a the tomato coarsely and then stair-fly fry some prawns.
Stair-fry it until it became golden brown.
The roast chicken only heated up with oven.
The OTAMA SAN GOHAN is Japaneseonly traditional food.
It only sprinkles the raw egg and a pinch dash of the soy source on warm rice.
They were easy to cooking but they tasted nice!!
After that I watched two movies, animation of genius boy and 007, on TV for approximately four hours.
So I felt tired my eyes and butt.
Thank you (The letter to my daughter's English teacher)
My 4-years-old daughter goes to an English lesson since when we decided to move to Singapore for 3 months.
She is interested in speaking English and writing alphabets now thanks to the teacher.
This is the letter below.
I appreciate you teaching English to my daughter.
She was always looking forward to your lesson.
Your lessons were energetic and so much fun.
When we decided her to go to a international school that only few Japanese go to, we noticed she had to start to study English immediately because she couldn't speak English at all.
I was looking for an English class around here.
At first we found a flyer at the play room.
We thought about just taking a trial lesson, but she told me that she wanted to go to the lesson again.
I am very surprised about her progress.
Now she is very interested in speaking English, writing the alphabet (words) and singing WHAT' S YOUR NAME?
song everyday.
We owe her progress to you
What your children speaking only English are same class is also good for her.
It will be a base when she goes to a new school.
If I didn't need to take care of my kids, I would want to take your lessons!
When you come to Singapore, please contact us.
It is very easy to come with kids because it is clean, safe, just a 1-hour time difference and close to the Haneda airport.
We are looking forward to seeing you and your children someday somewhere.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for all the staff and class mates.
Take care.
Best regard.
Basaballgame
Hello.
Yesterday I went to the stadium to see the baseball game.
After, university classes, I went directly back home, prepared packages and searched what time I should leave home and which trains I should take.
I went there with my friends.
The team I cheer is located in second position.
And if the team wins 8 games, the team will get first position.
But / However the remainder of its games is 9 games.
Therefore it is difficult for it to get first position.
The game began.
The starting pitcher was not good, therefore the opposition got 3 points easily.
But in this attack they couldn't get any points.
So in this game we lost.
We cheered very hard, but the miracle never happened.
So today I have a sore throat.
That's about it for today.
See you again / /
My hobbies
I have some hobbies.
Those are such things as playing sports, reading books, listening to music, taking walks.
My favorite hobby is talking with my friends, because I think it is the best time to be with my friends.
I gained about 10 kilograms after I quit my clubs in high school.
That's why I have to lose some weight!!!
So, I always jog and exercise. (
I wanna have a six-pack!! haha
Holidays
This weekend, there are three holidays in Japan.
They are on Saturday, Sunday and Monday.
Monday is EquinoxDay.
It will gradually become warm.
Japanese are waiting for cherry blossoms in this season.
What might be some of the causes of over-weight or obesity in the US?
Last English lesson, we discussed it.
There are some of causes, such as high calorie food, laziness...
In Japan, there are a lot of fast food restaurants around town. convenience store too. we can easily get food. same circumstance in the U.
S. but most Japanese people are not obese.
A teacher asked it `` why ``.
that is probably a result of lack of self control to eating.
I go to study English on Sundays.
Sometimes I can't explain what I thought and I can't come up with good idea thinking in English.
But, the moment I just touched the door knob at my home, I got my answer.
`` School lunch `` and `` Education of dietary `` could be good effect of self control to eating.
All of public primary school provide lunch for students.
That was wonderful system.
The nutritionist organized calorie control, a variety of menu every day, providing best season's food, traditional meal.
Through school lunch, students learn many kind of taste, knowledge of food and Japanese culture for six years at least.
once every three time a day though, It makes good habit and health.
How about my opinion?
a lot of workload
2010. 3. 26
Today My worklord were so many.
Yesterday was the same.
But Next week I will go on business trips.
I had to prepare for them.
Tomorrow I don't have much work.
I will go to the library and to the cafe to study electronics after that.
Today's music.
Claud Nugaro sings `` La Javanaise ``.
Wonderful voices.
Thanks for reading.
Play
I went to a play.
My friend starred in the play.
She and I became friends when we were junior high school students.
Our friendships has lasted for more than 10 years.
But I didn't know she is an actress.
I saw her act for the first time today.
I was moved.
I think I hope to continue a play for her.
Holiday is over.
Today is a Japanese National holiday.
So I took a three-day weekend.
Since it was rainy yesterday and today, My family and I couldn't enjoy it.
Children were playing games for a very longtime.
I can't help it.
reading diary
Tonight I read and corrected many diaries.
I might be make a mistake when corrected English.
But I think it's good way to learn from my mistake.
Thai
I tried to correct Thai language for who wrote in Thai.
It's also fun to read Thai writting from a non native speaker.
English
I started to practice my English since I've started my journey aboard.
And realized how languages can help you know more people.
Reading English make me feel very happy.
Then when I went to Japan.
My English could not help me
anymore.
I was impressed with my life there very much.
I only told them in English
that it would be good if I could speak
.
Japanese.
I could not writting Japanese or understand.
Japanese culture is interesting but Japanese people is quiet,
It's difficult to know what are in their mind.
So I started to reading japanese book which translate to Thai language.
I don't want to take Japanese class.
It might be boring.
So decide to learn by nature... viewing Japanese anime
and remembering Kanji that I like ^ _ ^
.
I learn a lot from Japanese food...
Japanese food is available at every corner in Thailand.
Coincidence
I think / believe birds of a feather flock together.
The other day, I met one of my classmate from high school at a station, for the first time in fifteen years.
She is a teacher as well.
I'm an English teacher.
On the other hand, she teaches correct walking and posture.
What a coincidence.
We made small talk / had a short conversation there and left.
When I started to walk, I had an urge of wanting to talk with her more!
So I called out to her and stopped her.
We exchanged our contact info and decided to meet again very soon.
We met once more two weeks ago, I felt strange / nostalgic then because we hadn't met each other for many years, but still we had many things (that we wanted) to tell each other.
Plenty of things to talk about, but there wasn't sufficient time.
We shouldn't sort people into levels / types / categories and I believe we are (all) living on the same level (same category, same world).
That's why we could meet again!
Spain!
I had to endure a long long flight to get to Spain.
Changing planes, it took nearly 15 hours in total from Nagoya to Barcelona.
Each seat has a small TV screen, with which we can see movies, listen to music, play games and you name it.
I don't like watching a screen when it's too close so I killed time reading something.
It was really wearing.
I will write details about my trip tomorrow.
The catcher in the rye
Today, I read `` The Catcher in the Rye `` as a summer homework assignment.
To tell the truth, I could not understand why this book is thought of as a masterpiece.
Because I didn't feel bored when I was reading it, but I was not very excited or moved.
But I like the characters in the book, because they are very characteristic.
If you had read the book, please tell me which part you think is interesting.
21. 12. 2012 * * * I'm a university student.
Hi, I've started Lang-8.
I want to learn English and find friends here.
Can we become friends?
I lived in London from 2005 to 2008,
But I can't speak English... (; _ ;)
So please teach me English!!
Now, I'm doing job hunting.
concert tickets
I called for a refund for the Park Yong-ha concert tickets.
I heard that they send money by registered mail by August 13th.
Culture of shame
Foreign media admires how Japanese people are behaving calmly, organised and in a supporting manner.
But it's common for us Japanese.
We think that making trouble for others is a very bad and shameful thing.
Every parent wants their children not to trouble others.
In the past, Japanese grew rice which was needed to help others in the community.
So getting along with people in the community is very important.
When parents scold ill-mannered children they use the same phrase `` I'm too ashamed to face people. `` Though this phrase is not so common to young parents, these ethics are in Japanese genes.
Hello World
Hi everyone!
This is my first post here.
It would be great if you correct my mistakes.
By the way, it's Christmas morning.
I say Merry Christmas to you all.
Thanks a. lot.
Day 74: I lied today.
I didn't know why I lied, but at that time I blanked out.
It was about a job I sought from the news paper.
Although I know a private school student like me in Singapore is stictly prohibit to go to have a job.
I am still going to the place to try my luck.
When my auntie asked me what kind of pass I held.
I felt totally nervous and words came out from my mouth: I was a student and holding a student pass.
Many of my friends went to work.
She has no doubt at me and told me to go tomorrow to meet the other people (maybe is the HR staff)
I was going to afraid what am I gon na do tomorrow..
Having a job here is good.
But for me I am more focused on learning the experience through working and communicating with others.
By the way, the job is really a short-term job (seller), which only lasts for two weeks.
And I am having my long holidays here.
Twilight
Today I saw a movie called Twilight.
I like this movie very much!
I've seen a lot of movies and cartoons about vampires.
But some of them made me feel disgusted.
There are always so much blood, people are so thirsty.
But Twilight is different.
Edward is cute, he cared about Bella.
And Bella is a strong girl.
She wasn't afraid of Edward.
Sometimes I think being a vampire is good.
They don't need to sleep, they run fast, they are sensitive.
But they can't eat food!
Aha, so I can't be a vampire, I like food!
We are the champions in Asia!
Yesterday, Japan's national soccer team played against Australia.
It was the final match of the Asian Cup 2011.
Five days ago, Japan played 120 minutes, including extra time, against South Korea, furthermore, the average height of the Australian team is taller than Japan.
So I thought most of the Japanese members would be tired and the game would be very hard for them.
As I thought, the game was very hard for Japan.
The game went into extra time twice in a row in the semi-final game for Japan.
However, at 110 minutes, Lee, who came off the bench, got the goal!
He became `` the Cinderella boy ``, or the hero, overnight.
I'm very glad that Japan won!
Love Karaoke
I like to sing very much.
Today, I went to the karaoke box with my son and neighbors.
My favorite karaoke songs are by Seiko Matsuda.
I had a relaxing time.
Today I might fall asleep soon.
Good Night!
GUITAR
Long ago, my father got a guitar.
I mean...
h He's still the owner.
I don't know but I often use it more than him.
so...
Anyway, I practice `` change the world ``.
I'll do my best!
it is rainning today~
It is the season of cherry trees in Japan right now.
all most japanese people have loved them for a long time.
Here are some reason why we love them.
The time from bloom to falling is very early.
It is like a human life. (tatemae!)
and we can enjoy drinking ^ ^
It is a lot of fun to drink while seeing them.
Headache
Today I was uncomfortable.
I had a headache, was tired, and had no appetite.
I slept all day until I had to work.
I'm afraid I got H1N1.
I hope the symptoms will dispear when I wake up tomorrow.
> <
Shanghai friends
The day before yesterday, I hung around with one of my Chinese friends.
We went to JINMAO OBSERVATORY88.
It was a rather high building.
After that time, while seeing landscapes, I could know about the basis of chinese politics.
Do you know me?
I am a hero.
But I am also a robot who is handled by a remote control.
Fortunately, I am a hero of justice.
So I am called, `` The Hero of Justice. ``
But you should think once more.
If the remote control is taken by an evil person,
PS.
Hint: In Japan.
I went to Okinawa!!
I went to Okinawa last month with my son and my boyfriend.
Okinawa is in the southernmost part of Japan so it was hot there.
We enjoyed snorkeling!
We went to the beach which is an desert island near Naha.
I felt like I was in dream because the sea was so beautiful and there was a lot of fish.
And we went to Okinawa Prefectural Peace Memorial Museum.
I think that the war should never of happened.
We should never kill another people.
friend's birthday
Today was my chinese friend's birthday.
She is a 26 year-old woman who works for a travel agency.
In addition, she is pursuing a modeling career in Japan.
We met at a night club in Tokyo.
Our dreams are different, but I think we are similar in that we both want to pursue our own dreams.
I feel like her a sister.
I wonder what I should give her as a present, so could you give me some advice?
Foreign baby
I can meet foreigners if I go to the city area in Tokyo, but I won't be able to meet a foreign baby.
It's only adult or children that I meet.
I like babies so I'm always looking forward to meet a foreign baby
I could met a foreigners baby at supermarket.
He was so lovely.
I had been watching at him and his dad talked to me.
He has been living in Japan for 10 years and he likes to talk with Japanese people.
He wants to learn Japanese skill.
I think our language skills were even.
He wants his baby to speak Japanese so he's learning Japanese everyday.
T.
G.
I.
Friday!
Recently, I'm fascinated with a TV series named `` How I met your mother. `` (Though I don't watch it on TV but the Internet because is hasn't been introduced into Taiwan.
)
And thank God it's Friday night so that I have time to watch the newest episode.
This sitcom is talking about a man named Ted telling a story about how he found his true love to his children.
Well, however, Ted hasn't seen the `` lucky `` women from season 1 to 4.
Ha ha!
My favorite character is Barney which is not only a successful businessman but a humorous friend of Ted's.
He always makes his own theory about life!
:-D
Except the humor in the series, another reason why I love this sitcom is that I am looking forward to a close, meaningful relationship like the one between Ted and his friends.
Hope our TV station can bring the series into Taiwan soon!
A second date
Today, since people turn out to be more and more rational and have higher demands about the opposite sex, along with an open mind about dating which has nurtured tons of different reality dating shows.
Some of them are really funny, but some are absurd.
I believe one of these shows is a romance killer.
This show features `` Parents dating Guys ``.
Ridiculous?!
A date that can exude both parties' warmth and charisma.
Sounds a little bit tricky?
Haha, I just did it in the easiest way, chose a good restaurant, put two nice people together and let them talk!
Without audiences, love judges, parents, just a friendly and private atmosphere, which allows them to be themselves and enjoy the moment.
Last night was the second date (that) I arranged for my friend and hopefully they can work things out!
Crossing my fingers for them ^ _ ^!!! lol
playing the two roles
I am challenging a task that I have not ever done in the business.
This is also very valuable to me.
Meeting the Challenge and Grasping the Opportunity
Without fail when there's great need, great hearts and minds rise up to meet the challenge.
In two months, my professor will take some students to Ohio university in America for a month.
But whomever wants to go there, must pass the exam and interview.
Going abroad is my dream, so I really cherish this opportunity.
It is a good chance to strengthen my knowledge, broaden my horizon, enjoy foreign customs, and also realize my dream.
Without any means to improve my poor English I can try speaking more, listening more, reading more, and so on.
In my opinion, it is a difficult process to overcome myself, but I must insist on doing my best, no matter how difficult it is.
Once you make up your mind, persevere in doing it.
Yangyang, come on, you can do it.
Yes, you can.
Er... but how to start?
Got the gold medal.
I have been looking for correct my English diary.
Today, I finally found nice site.
I was suprised when I found it. I have been studying English for 2 years because I want to make a lot of friends all over the world.
Yesterday, Kitajima Kousuke who is a breast stroke swimmer, got the gold medal.
I was excited, He marked new world record. He got it the second time.
He moved to tears when he won.
He is smaller than most people but he did it.
I was very impressed.
Icy, Snow-covered Trees
Today's pictures are icy, snow-covered trees at the top of Mt.
ZAO.
They are illuminated during the night.
They were very beautiful, and they looked as if they were large creatures!
The top of the mountain was very cold, even though I was wearing snowboard gear.
I hope I don't catch a cold.:)
Wishing You Happiness In Paradise
I was really shocked by the death of Stephen Gately.
I just listened to his bandBoyzone's brilliant song `` No Matter What `` on the way back home.
Stephen was cute and brave but now he is gone.
When I was in junior high school everything seemed boring and meaningless, and I also did poorly in my studies.
One day, I failed anexam.
At that time I had no place to go ; my parents hatedwhen I underachieved but suddenly a fair-sounding voice floated to my ear.' I can't deny what I believe, I can't be what I'm not.' I was astonished by the voice and lyrics which cheered me up.
Your lovely face looked like a ray of hope.
I wish you happiness in paradise.
Pay attention.
With knowing comes caring, and with caring there is hope that we could make way for a healthy environment that sustains us.
An environmistalist said in TED.
[ Independent paragraph ] Oil has been flooding the gulf of Mexico for three months.
[ Independent paragraph ] There has been only 15 days without war since the beginning of humanity, which means an uncountable number of people have been killed and been killing at the same time.
[ Independent paragraph ] On the other side of the globe, a great number of people live on less than a dollar.
Clearly, the world is lopsided.
Watching CNN and reading The New York Times, I am suddenly wondering how many of us believe we know what's going on outside our own little world.
Whether things they play out are plausiable or not, one thing we need to know is that when you try to know what is true, you might be able to help anything that can chage the world in a baby step.
Pay attention.
Diary 2011 / 7 / 6
I'm building computer program algorithms even when I am dreaming at night, because I've been doing computer programs all day long.
It wasn't the correct algorithm, I am trying to make a block puzzle.
The program will be piling blocks up or sorting them or doing something else.
I went to Tokyo to work in Japan.---Part-6
For 10 months, I studied Java and Japanese.
It was particularly difficult to study Japanese.
( It was very hard to study Japanese.)
Sometimes, I felt frustrated and despaired.
Softball
Next Wednesday, the economics seminar softball match will take place.
I have hardly played neither baseball nor softball, so I practiced today after school.
I had played for 7 years, so I like almost all sports.
However, the experience of volleyball does not transfer well in softball because the form is different
Anyway, I'm really looking forward to play the game!!
I start to learn English by Lang-8.
I am a grad student.
I must to read literature, which is written in English.
So, I am starting to learn English for the first time in a decade.
Board Meeting
I will have a board meeting tomorrow.
I am an auditor of a construction company.
Today the Japanese construction industry faces a serious crisis.
I want to improve this situation.
about reading books
When someone asks me, `` What's your favorite thing? ``
I'll respond, `` My hobby is reading books, ``
In fact, most people, when asked about their hobby,
they wouldn't usually answer that they `` love to read books ``.
but I really enjoy reading,, not only books, but papers, articles,
and magazines,
to read some sentenses is stimurate my Brain,
maybe in my Brain, now making new accese of ENG nulln (synaps)
haha,
thanks for reading and fixing my wrong sentences,,
ps: if you have another more good expression what more use in native comunity and more naturely, I want to learn GOOD sentences,,
All day working!
I have been working non-stop.
I have to work from 9: 00a. m. to 10: 00 p. m.
Working in a bookstore is busy but exciting.
I have to work now.
Our break time is too short.
Be leaving
How time flies!
I will graduate from this college in two months. my major is English teaching, and I have got a job as an English teacher in a middle school.
Now the only task is to finish my thesis.
Is it real that I have to leave this college in two months?
Oh, how wonderful the college life is!
I don't want to leave this school and to be a teacher.
Once you get into the society, your life wonn't be as simple as that in college.
I haven't been prepared to face all the things.
Because it is such big change in my lifetime.
Anyway, I will cherish the rest of my college life.
The four years' college life will be a colourful and precious memory for me forever,
We may win a trip to NY!
I'm participating in a university contest involving some tests (I don't feel test is the best word... can you think of a better one?), all about the Millenium Objetives stated by the UNO.
After each team submits its proposal, there's a week for people to vote for their faouvorite on the web.
After that, a jury scores / rates each one, and so the winner for each test is chosen.
There's a final prize for the three highest scoring teams at the end of the contest. They all can enroll for free in a postgraduate course (or a language one, if they haven't finished their degree).
Additionally, the first team gets to travel to New York!
We won the last test, and each of the members of our team got a mobile phone.
As I had just bought a Motorola Milestone (the european version of Droid), I gave it to my father, who's actually very happy with it, since it's a cute small Nokia with wifi.
We're going first next time, but since they try to give one prize to a different team each time, we expect the jury to make the ones who are going third win this time.
But we still hope we win in the end and visit USA!!
Wish us luck:)
At Tokyo Disney Resort!!!
I went to Tokyo Disney Resort on February 8th and 9th with my boyfriend.
On the first day, we went to Tokyo Disney Sea.
We rode many attractions and we did shopping in many kinds of stores.
My favorite attraction was Indiana Jones.
I recommend it!
In the second day, we went to Tokyo Disney Land and we appreciated Cirque du Soleil.
We enjoyed Mickey's Philhar Magic.
It is a new attraction.
On the other hand, Cirque du Soleil was such an impressive show.
We were excited at the show!
We enjoyed so much on this trip.
I want to stay more ; (
Please correct this sentence.
Today's lesson
Today, it was really cold.
I'm sick of cold weather every day.
I love Sommer. summer.
I'm eagerly waiting for summer to come.
Anyway, I went to english school before work.
Steven taught me today.
We didn't talk about the content of the textbook much, but we talked a lot about each other's favorite country, city, food and special experiences.
It was really nice.
It was hot today.
The weather got really hot. Becauce the air conditioner in our office was broken, I couldn't study at the office.
But it's getting near to the date of my graduate school test so, I must work hard to study english. I feel stressed every day
Shinkansen
URL
I'm proud of the Shinkansen.
This is the symbol of a lot of technologies in Japan.
Last month I rode a Sanyo Shinkansen train.
I was surprised at the quietness of the Shinkansen.
I was able to read a book comfortably although the train ran very fast.
Yesterday I saw the weather forecast
As soon as I woke up this morning, I checked outside.
I opened window but it was not raining.
During the day I waited for the rain as I looked up at the sky and I was thinking what the problem with weather forecast organization.
I think we have one of the most powerful computers in the world at that organization but they know nothing.
I was shocked at their disappointing work.
I'm busy.
Tomorrow will be sports day at my daughter's school.
After that, we will go to my mother's home.
I'll return home on Monday.
See you later!
Street live!
I play street live at every Saturday.
It is held near a station.
I met many people at the live.
I studied many things from there.
For example...
Courtesy, Gentleness, Inclemency... there still.
Last Saturday, I played on the street.
Then I get courtesy.
I was very happy.
In the future, I want to sing for Gratitude.
Thank you.
The test for mobile system engineer
Next month, I'm going to take the test for becoming a mobile system engineer.
The examination fee is $ 150.
I think that it's very high.
So I want to pass it the first time.
I want to work hard!!!
lost property
After work, I went to the station's lost and found office.
I'm glad to have it back.
Early Morning
Today I woke up at 7. 30 am.
because I have to go the ANZ bank to get a saving card.
I will move to the city this Saturday.
We should make a note of what we need.
This is a busy morning.
There are many things I should do.
Japanese tea ceremony
My Japanese friend sent me some tea implements for Japanese tea ceremony last month.
I liked to learn how to serve green tea. I made some friends at the lesson.
I know it's thick and bitter.
After I made it, I drank the green tea.
I wonder!
I'm going to send a message to my friend...
PLEASE check my mail X (
[ I'm so sorry...
I couldn't send you any mail sooner.
You know, the earthquake affected my family very badly.
The tsunami destroyed my mother's country (home?).
But my grandma is safe.
And my cousins are also fine.
:)
I wanted to see them.
However it was too terrible to live.
( There was a power failure until now.)
I pray for them to return to normal life! ]
Someone help me!
What's the difference between `` french fries `` and `` fries potatoes ``?
Can't I say `` fried potatoes ``? You can.
Is this wrong?
The history of my learning English
I started learning English in the first class of my school, when I was six years old.
In Russia this language is an official program in all schools.
You can choose from three: English, French and German, but English is the most popular.
When I was 6, the year was 1993 and in my country we hadn't a lot of good teachers, because over many years before the people hadn't the possibility of treavelling abroad and no chance opportunity to practice language...
But my mother allways says that it's just a pretextes and nothing to prevent you if you have a purpose.
When I was thirteen, I changed schools and started to learn in a gymnasium.
Here all was different, and the teachers too.
In the first lessons of English I didn't understend anything-the teacher didn't say one verb in Russian.
It was horrible!
In the grammar exercises, which I did for hours (?) I couldn't correct any sentences (?).
I looked for every verb in the dictionary and cried...
But several times I passed my exam with `` excellent ``.
But my grammar now is just pre intermidiate.
Then I learning english in the University.
I don't know why, but it's VERY hard for me...
I was the worst in my groupe (the worse group in course:)) But then, little by little, I started to talk in English.
3 years I don't learn English hard, no have a practic, but I now how to wach the favorite films in the originale and how to reed books-it's wondeful!
And now I give the promise for myself, that I will learn english by the leavel entermidiate and more then this level, and I will never neglect it!
Because it is very important ; I'll never get a good job without it, and I'll never understand half of the beautiful sites in the Internet!
And I like to draw in Photoshop and Illustrator, and many other things!
PS.
Somebody, who is learning Russian, and all who want to talk with a Russian girl-lets talk by skype!
A visit to Huang river park
Today all of my classmates and I went to the Huang River Park.
The Huang river is the second longest river of China.
As its name implies, the water is very yellow carrying lots soil.
It was little cold and windy, so the air is stale.
I regretted wearing new clothes, when I came back they were full of dust.
The river is very long. I can't see the end, and the water is peaceful.
Everyday learning!
These days my lovely boy is getting naughty.
He is crawling everywhere as his instinct tells.
When he gets silence, it is a dangerous sign to me.
He is chewing something really dangerous.
Today he chewed a piece of kleenex.
He would almost be stucked.
I noticed it because he coughed.
I put my fingers into his little mouth, and pull it out.
While I was washing the dishes, he did it.
I tried to keep an eye on him while doing house work,
but it happened only in a few seconds I didn't see.
Everyday he is growing little by little, step by step,
and everyday I am learning how to deal with his can-do things.
Spring Vacation is Almost Here!
It's been a long time since I wrote a diary entry.
My university classes started on January 8th, but they will be over shortly.
Time flies!
When spring vacation comes, I will have to study English harder, and I'd like to write a diary entry everyday.
I would be so happy if you would comment on my diary.
Oversleep
Today, I have two classes.
But I slept in late this morning!
Tomorrow, I have an English class.
I'm absolutely getting up early!!
A New Plan for Japan
From the Wall Street Journal today, I found an interesting article about the future plan of Japan.
The article is from the Review & Outlook section.
The title is `` A New Plan for Japan ``.
URL
As far as I am concerned, the article clearly suggests three main solutions for Japan's problems.
Actually, there are not only three solutions in the article, but I just picked out three solutions.
I felt this was a good article for both Japanese and foreign people to understand Japan's current situation.
The first solution is to lower corporate and personal taxes.
The taxes in Japan are relatively higher than those in most of other developed countries.
To signal young leaders that entrepreneurship will be rewarded, this solution is important.
The second solution is pension reform to control the exploding cost of old-age payouts.
As you may know, Japan has the second lowest birthrate.
This will result in a rapidly aging society with fewer children.
The current pension system was mainly created in 1985.
I think it's already outdated.
The third solution is immigration reform.
As mentioned above, because Japan will become the aging society with fewer children, Japan needs people from foreign countries.
However, inviting foreign people are not easy due to the following two reasons.
First, Japan is an island country, so many Japanese people have not had much opportunity to communicate with foreign people.
Second, many Japanese people can not speak foreign languages very well.
This solution is easy to say, but not easy to implement.
The longer Japan delays, the harder it will be to implement the solutions.
To improve the current situation is really difficult, but it seems to me that it is possible.
I believe Japan can thrive again with the right leader and the right reforms.
I also want to be of some help to revive Japan.
noooooow...
I'm dying for time!
It's a pain to do my homework.
Now, I am making an album to give hostfamily in NZ.
I'm looking forward to seeing them!
Starting on-line shopping.
I have been here, NY for 4 months.
My life is changing in NY.
For example, today I ordered some clothes online (you don't say `` internet shop ``).
I felt happy!
It is a very simple and easy work for American, especially for me, this work is not simple one.
When I used to live in Seoul I used to shop online.
There are many products that are cheaper online than in retail stores.
After I left Seoul, I stopped shopping online.
Because I have a something like phobia with the internet shopping.
I couldn't believe the charging method.
I suspected that way.
It was much easier than the Korean method.
I just need credit card numbers, that's it!
I was worried that somebody would take my credit card number.
Finally, I found the official website. (For what?)
It made me feel more comfortable and safe to buy there.
I visited A & F official website.
I was surprised!!
It was very cheap!!!!
There is no A & F store in Korea, so people sell this brand.
And is very expensive!!
Because of this experience, I couldn't stop shopping on A & F website.
I ordered some clothes and they are going to shipped on FEB.
I'm a little disappointed with the shipping speed but it doesn't matter because I'm really satisfied with the prices and the designs.
I hope it arrives soon!
And, I will try to use the E-bay, as soon as possible!
hahaha
My very first diary entry on Lang-8
On the first day of 2010, like every other year, I made a new years resolution.
One of them is to study English hard.
Bur this year is a little bit different than the previous years.
I am planning to move to a foreign company, which means my ability to speak and write English should improve.
So I decided to write an English diary as a way to improve my english.
And luckily, I found THIS SITE!!
I believe that writing an English diary will really help to improve my English skills.
Typhoon is coming
A big strong typhoon is headed towards the middle area of Japan.
Right now its raining heavily and a strong wind is blowing here, so I closed all shutters to protect the windows and reduce the noise.
I'm a little worried about whether I' lll be able to commute to my office tomorrow morning or not.
Language is difficult.
Today, I quarrelled with my wife over a trivial matter.
My poor expressions made her irritated.
I should watch my language.
Moreover, I should attend her feelings more once more.
The situation made me realize the important things.
First experience
My eleven month old son stood by himself for the first time today!
However, he started to cry hard afterward.
I'm want to learn english
Hello, everybody.
My name is Hsiang-Chin.
My English is very bad.
But I want to learn english, so my friend Charles tell me this personals website.
I don't know any grammar and I'm afraid to speak English.
In fact, I want to say so many things, but writing in English is very tiring.
July 18th
Hello! I'm sorry to write my diary late ; (
Today, I slept for only two hours.
So I felt sleepy all day.
Why I stayed up late, because I watched ladies soccer game! The game was between Japan called `` Nadeshiko Japan `` and America.
This game was very tough game for each team.
The first half of the game was a draw and the second half of the game was a draw.
The overtime game was a draw too! I was very strained by PK! I'm afraid of watching PK.
Finally, Japan won the game, so `` Nadeshiko Japan `` is top team in the world!! I was excited, so I couldn't sleep ;) But I don't regret watching soccer.
I want to play some sports! Thank you very much:)
First write
I have started lang-8 today.
I decided that I will write a diary everyday at lang-8 about dairy thing to learn English.
Today, I took a walk around my house by bicycle.
I visited a Freemarket which was held at park.
The sounds of (people's) footsteps / Footsteps
People seems to have particular own sounds of steps.
I can recognize a person's ones, because it is a matter of life or death for me.
Yes, I am specifically referring to my boss.
Before he open a door of a room where I am, I hear it and shape up, so if I fail to hear it and he accost me, I'm really surprised and suspected by him even though I didn't do something bad.
I thank my sharp ears for (the sake of) my survival until now.
Which is the good for MMA fighter to be strong or to win?
So many MMA fighters think they want to be stronger than they are.
This is the most important thing to them but, my opinion is different.
Even if they are strong, they don't win sometimes.
MMA is a sport that shouldn't be though of as a regular sport.
There are a fighters who don't think MMA is a sport and when they lose fights, they seem like they want to kill their opponent. It goes to show a strong person can lose to a weak person.
I want to say, there is no future in MMA for just the strong.
Fedor, who is Russian, is not very strong.
Yet he is named the one of the best fighters in the world.
3: 25 a. m. JST
It is 3: 25 a. m. Japan Standard Time (JST).
I'm so sleepy.
But I must do my homework!
I don't know.
I don't know how to use lang-8.
please tell me how to use lang-8.
Today, I went to university.
In English class there was a test: (
Thursday October 22nd 2009
It's two ten in the afternoon right now.
In fact, this isn't the time I'm supposed to write in my diary on Lang-8.
But, I'm going to do it now, because my laptop is supposed to get repaired, and in a couple of hours, the mechanic is going to be here to pick it up.
So, there's not much time left.
Well, the reason why I call the repairman is because it has been making loud noises and the screen often makes waves.
It has been about eight months since I purchased it, so any service is free.
Oh god.
now here he's is.
I got ta get the intercom.
english accents
Okay right now I want to know what the best way is to learn English accents?
Since I'm weak in understanding the accents of a language.
I hope someone here can give me some tips or steps that I should take in order to improve my communication skills
Thanks =)
I am new here
I am new here and I don't know if it is right place to write...
One of my friends, Yoshimi, introduced me to this website.
It's good to exchange culture and language that we are trying to learn.
I will try to write everyday, I am planning to write to a bussiness person soon, so I really need your help.
Thank you
It's raining, not men.
Is almost 4: 30 pm and I haven't done my housework yet, it's been a very hot day, I don't feel like doing anything, I was thinking about jumping into the pool, but I have to wash it and fill it first and that is going to take some time.
What else can I do?
Uhh, it's raining!
I'm gon na dance in the rain, yes, that's what I'm going to do.
If I get a cold, I'm going to give you tell you first.
Thanks for reading and correcting.
See you, guys!
only some sentences
It can't be said in simple words.
I dreamed about her the night before yesterday.
I dreamed that I found her just sitting by my side when I awoke.
Are the sentences above right?
I meet a friend today.
Today, I met an old friend.
She is my old friend.
For long time, I didn't see her.
So My heart flutters with expectation.
She is still being cute.
I drank beer with her.
I asked her if she had a boyfriend.
She answered, `` Yes, I have a boyfriend. ``
I was a little disappointed.
But I'm OK.
Someday, I will find a girlfriend.
My chance will surely come.
Tex-Mex
Tex-Mex is a popular food in Texas.
It is a combination of American and Mexican cuisine.
It features the heavy use of melted cheese, beans, chili and tortillas.
It is very nice.
The only problem is that it is very heavy food.
When I have Tex-Mex at lunch, I can't eat anything at night....
Hello!
I am new to lang-8.
I'm learning architecture now.
Everyday, I work very hard to learn it.
But recently, I have wanted to speak English.
If I can speak English fluently someday, I want to go abroad.
And I want to see the wonderful architecture of foreign countries.
That's why, I started learning English.
I want to make many friends!
heavy stomach
I woke up earlier than normal today.
Because I had a headache and a heavy stomach.
I thought that was why I felt bad in the bed.
I had a dinner at 11pm yesterday and slept as soon as possible.
I didn't feel that way before, yet I did the same things.
I am disappointed that I'm still not young!
Happy new year
We have a three day holiday, so I wlll spend these days playing.
Though today is second day of new year, I say best wishes for my friends all the same.
Happy new year, my friends and my relatives.
Yesterday I got up late as usual, and then had lunch, went to the supermaket with my good friend, and bought something for my family.
Yesterday was a busy day, but I was very happy.
I felt the time passed faster than usual.
How time flies!
This is in 2009, it's so fast.
I am older than before.
Today I had a tour of this city by bike.
It's nice, and I like it, if I have enough time, I will do it again.
So Sorry!
I haven't written here for a long time because I found a job.
I worked as a waitress in a cafe.
It was very difficult work because we have to work overtime.
Every day, 15 hours... without interruption.
But it was very interesting work too.
We have many foreigners as our clients and I really could try my strength in English) It ` s so interesting to talk with the British, Germans, Italians, Danes, Finns, Croats...
and many others)
One Dutchman always ask us `` How are you? ``, nobody understood him, except me and I could talk with him for a long time.
It was a difficult, but very interesting time)
After my hard-days I am going to go to Minsk, Belarus
Asashoryu's Retirement
Asashoryu is a sumo champion.
Sumo is one of the traditional Japanese sports.
He has recently been accused of punching a man while drunk.
A sumo champion, called a yokozuna, is required to be strong not only physically, but also spiritually.
He is one of the strongest sumo wrestlers in sumo history.
I am not familiar with the sport, but I know his name.
He is very famous, as even I know who he is.
It is a pity that he retires because of this boring case.
A Backpacker
During the last summer vacation, I traveled around Southeast Asia ; Malaysia (Malacca and Kuala Lumpur), Cambodia (Siem Reap), and Myanmar (Bagan).
I met a Japanese backpacker when I was in KL.
We lived in the same guesthouse and we were the only Japanese who was there.
We became fast friends.
He is 27, older than me by 6 years.
He is an experienced backpacker.
He said he traveled around the world.
His travel stories were really interesting and exciting.
We talked and stayed up late every night.
I like his travel stories especially in Thailand and India.
It was really fun.
When the last day of my stay there, He said He would plan to go to see Mt.
Kinabalu in Sabah (located in Borneo Island).
Today I read his blog.
He is now in Israel.
Then I know backpackers are always freewheeling.
The first diary
Hello, everybody
I'm very surprised and happy to find such a wonderful website.
I don't understand how it works yet, however, I can't help posting my first diary.
As for ordinary Japanese people, my English level is supposed to be high to some extent.
Actually, everybody in my company counts on me when it comes to English, for example when working with customers or translating documents from the U.
S.
A.
But as you can see, my writing ability is like childs play.
I'm always dreaming about having my English compositions proofread by native English speakers.
If you notice something, for example, grammatical errors, or unnatural expressions, please tell me.
This time, I tried writing a diary without using my dictionary.
So the contents are probably poor..
May it be sunny tomorrow...
May it be sunny tomorrow...
I'm planning to go hiking with friends tommorow.
I hope it'll be sunny..
or cloudy may be better because I don't want to burn my skin so much.
The mountain is called `` OOYAMA `` which means a big mountain.
It is said that you can be healthy and happy or your wish will come true if you climb this mountain.
On the top of mountain, there is a shrine built in the 700's.
My junior high school friends and I are very interested in this legend.
We will each pack water, lunch, and our wishes in our backpacks.
Because it has been raining for 3 days, I made `` TERUTERU-BOZU `` in hopes of sunshine.
They say it'll be sunny if you make `` TERUTERU-BOZU ``.
It is an old Japanese custom, although only children do it in these days...
so I may be child.
w
Photo No, 1 shows how it is hung on the window in my room.
Usually it is hung under the roof, but I couldn't do it.
Phot No2 shows what TERUTERU-BOZU is like. is is made of paper and has eyes and mouth looking like joy.
They looks lik swimming in the watery sky now, but tommorrw.. they will be dancing in sunshine! ^ ^
Dancing
I went to a gym last night.
I joined an aerobics class.
Everyone who joined this class was very good.
Even a middle-aged man was better than me!
I am a beginner.
When everyone jumped left, I jumped right.
Oh nooo.
I made a lot of mistakes.
I wished I could sink into the floor.
It was very hard and I was very tired.
At any rate, it was fun!
I will join this class next time.
Don't be such a smart person.
Historically / in the past *, I am a well planned person so there are always schedules that keep me from doing anything spontaneous.
So to speak, there are certain things I have to do almost every day before the sun sets, such as reading a book, watching news, and writing something.
Otherwise, I feel something wrong as if I didn't do a homework that would punish me when I finally hand out the empty note to a meticulous teacher.
Ironically, I found myself hanging out with my friend who came here in the early morning, taking a whole day from me. We did stupid things like killing flies, making me think of what is more important than that.
Don't be such a smart person who might lose better things.
I am very stressed right now.
I spoke English today.
It was very difficult to say anything so I used the wrong words.
so, I spoke English incorrectly.
English is very difficult.
When I talk, I forget what to say.
Only very simple things.
I felt very tired.
Beautiful flowers bloomed in the sky!
I want you to see these pictures.
They're very lovely.
It looks like jewelry.
I took these on August 15.
I thought there were about a hundred thousand people on the ground.
I had never seen so many people, so I was very surprised:).
By the way, what do you like to do in the summer?
Please tell me: D
Gardenig
Hi.
How are you doing?
Yesterday, I went to Home Depot to buy a bag of soil and a planter.
Oh, I just remembered, I also bought a set of starting pots forthose herbs.
After I got home, I started repotting and sowing.
Actually I just have
a patio, not a garden.
: (
I wanted to do sowing of Violas but I didn't have enoughstarting pots, so I will go to Home Depo again tomorrow.
sensitivity
I want to use the word `` sensitivity `` properly.
a) I'm lacking the sensitivity needed to depict whether an expression is formal or informal.
b) I have to have a sensitivity towards others, or girls won't like me.
Is there anything wrong with them?
Particularly I want to know which verb is incorrect in (b).
English skill
hello
Hello.
My name is Adrian but my friends call me Adi.
I'm an 18 years old boy and I live at Romania.
I am a beginer at learning english, and I want to improve.
This is the reason why I created an account on this site.
I hope you will help me.
Thank you.
human relations
I think it is difficult to communicate with others.
Especially, in the company, there are many relations.
For example, there are my boss, my superiors and my juniors.
I want to know how people communicate with each other in foreign countries.
It doesn't mean I'm not doing well.
I'm confused because there are various people, and many thoughts.
OMG
Unfortunately...
I think I caught a cold:-(
.. in LA... omgomgomgomg...!
I took some medicine, but I still feel bad.
I should sleep today...:-(
Yesterday, I went to a shopping mall called `` Dessert Hills `` and I found a lot of reasonable clothes, bags, shoes and so on.
I bought a lot of stuff and walked a lot...
that's why I'm sick now. lol
But I had a great time!
Now, I'm gon na go to sleep....
bye~
at school
I'm at school now.
It is cold this morning!
So I wore a sweater.
Have a good day ;)
Self-introduction
My name is Ella. I'm Chinese and my Chinese name's Momeifen.
I'm twenty years old.
I work in an e-commerce company.
I like to make friends.
I like English, but I don't speak in English regularly, so my English has been declining.
I hope you can understand this
Drinking party
I wasn't able to drink alcohol because of medicine. I wanted to drink, though.
But I enjoyed the drinking party!
Although I want to write more about it, I am sleepy
Good night.
What I did today
My son got sleep at long last.
He took a bath at seven, but he didn't try to get to bed.
Because he still wanted to play.
I regretted to keep putting him down for 3 hours during the day.
It has been raining since this morning.
So, the temperature got down as compared with yesterday.
Saturday
I always watch TV on a Saturday night.
I can't watch TV on weekdays Because I am working.
I like comedy story and history story.
Child's First Errand
How old were you when you first went on an errand?
Today, I enjoyed a TV program about little boy's and girl's first errands.
Children who appear on this TV program laugh, cry and go shopping.
Their parents send them on their first errand.
It's so funny really.
This TV program reminds me of my first errand. haha.
* * * To me, the new Lang-8 design is not easy to use... * * *
PART-1
PART-2
New computer
I bought a new notebook PC.
It was a little bit expensive for me, but I was so happy to get it.
I carry it everywhere, and show it to my friends.
They were interested in my notebook and touched it.
I decided that I'd manage it carefully to not break it.
Epitome of Cool
Sometimes, When I get back from college, I feel that I can do absolutely nothing but watch a movie.
I feel so exhausted but I can not sleep because If I slept then when I wake up, I'd have to start studying again or go to college.
Watching a movie is like the fun pause between two busy periods.
Yesterday, I watched a movie called The Expendables.
It's an action movie.
It didn't wow me really, not like Inception anyway, because its story wasn't strong or strange enough.
It was very plain and straight forward.
The ending was great, though.
Jason Statham recited a piece of poetry that made it a funny ending.
There is only one line I didn't understand.
What is the ``
Epitome of Cool
``?
Here is the ending.
Enjoy!
dairy
But the stuation is being recovered by help not only from other Japanese but also from countries all over the world.
Unfortunately, we can't say there is no problem at the Fukushima reactor.
Now I'm in Nagoya, Aichi.
I am going to move out to Saitama (in the Kanto area) from where I currently live just because I study at the university in Saitama.
I'm very worried about the radiation.
And Kanto area reaches the electronic shortage.
We don't know when the situation will recover perfectly.
I might have suffered from heatstroke.
I might have suffered from heatstroke.
I felt dizzy and had to cool my bedroom down.
Then I drank of bottle of Pocari Sweat and slept for a while.
So I'm fine now.
Exams....
The worst thing in life: (
Good morning:)
Exams are the worst thing in life: D, It really is
I know that It is essential but It make me really stressed out: (
I Love to learn new things especially languages but I want to learn it because I want to not because I have to, you know
The worst thing in the world is sitting in a room with only your pen and watching the time go away
What if I don't remember what I have studied because of stress and worry!
But whatever I will do my best and try to work hard enough to do well in these exams, hopefully: D
Pray for me: D: D
Reading Books in the Bath
I really like reading books.
My favorite time is when I read books while taking a bath!
I usually take a bath for more than half an hour.
After my families go to bed, I concentrate in reading books.
Nothing bothers me, I can be absorbed in books.
However, I have to be careful, or books will swell up.
I read documentaries, science fictions, mysteries...
and many more.
But I don't like love stories.
I think reading about others' love affairs doesn't make any sense for me.
I like the stories that are unexpected / surprising, like a roller-coaster.
coaster.
Earthquake aftershock
After great earthquake happened, I often feel shaking though it's not earthquake.
I expected an earthquake would occur while I was washing my face in the morning.
I'm so nervous about earthquakes.
I prepared an emergency bag in case.
And I have to fix my furnitures to prevent from slipping.
Preparing in case is very important.
I learned it.
my weekend
Good morning!
Last weekend was very nice!
On Friday I went with my class and my teacher to the Botanical Garden.
It was very nice.
We walked around the garden, we saw the animals and differents trees ; we had a small lunch
I want to improve myself.
Do you like making a plan to do something?
I like making a plan, but I can't follow my plan.
For example, I like making a schedule of one day.
I write something to do for one day on a notebook, and I try to fulfill them.
For three days I can keep my schedule, but after three days I can't do that.
I think I'm a lazy person, so I tend to choose an easy way out.
I want to do many things in one day.
Maybe I'm greedy, and want to try too many things.
On the other hand, I think I spend too many hours using the computer.
I like checking SNS sites.
It is fun indeed, but it is a waste of time for me.
If I stop checking sites so often, I think I can save more time.
Then I can do another things.
I need to reconsider how I use / manage my time.
Though I'm not good at managing my time at all, I want to try to be good at it.
I will make a good schedule which I will follow.
I want to have stronger mind to keep my schedule, and I want to control my time, not let time control me.
Halloween
Hi everyone it's been a while since I wrote my last diary here.
I'd like to write about my first Halloween.
We don't celebrate ancestors or dead like the way western people do.
My city has Gozan no okuribi.
But it's like
I had a so much fun this Halloween.
On Friday I was Scream and on Saturday I was a blond haired girl.
It reminded me of a high school festival.
I saw a lot of funny costumes on the street which has a lot of clubs.
What I found through clubing as a girl is that some guys are so disgusting!!
Especially one guy who tried to dance with me was so disgusting!!
He was getting too close and touching my ass with his leg even though I'm a man.
Here is a funny story.
On Saturday we went to a club after drinking.
The club had some small stages and I was dancing on it then a guy came to dance with me.
He didn't notice that I'm also a man.
After 5 or 10 minutes of dancing, at last he noticed that I was a man.
He was like' OMG!!' n held his head.
Anyway I enjoyed it a lot!!
How was your Halloween??
What was your costume??
How do you deal with that kind of guy in a club??
Thank you for reading!!:)
It would be great if you leave a comment or corrections.
Simplification
I wasted too much time watching Youtube.
I watched without any real desire to watch.
That's a kind of' inertia'.
Most of the videos are less enjoyable.
Political ones often are full of childish swearing.
I don't want to regard these comments as representing the average intellectual level of the viewer as a whole.
I had to shft to better one, more fruitful one, even obeying that inertia.
Then, I found a Japanese TV program introducing Wittgenstein's' Tractatus Logico-philosophicus'.
I was interested in how they explain the book which I read few years ago (in Japanese) only the begining and gave up.
But that program was trashy ; it simplified the discussion too much, and pretended that the matter is really simple.
I found that those who swearing or explaining are not only simplifying the matter too much, but also tending to neglect what is really not simple.
These oversights are sometimes massive.
Of course, any understanding of objects may involve some simplification (as I'm doing now).
But it never means that the objects themselves are really simple.
We just have simple ideas about complex objects.
Although I don't understand Wittgenstein's that book, it seemed that he didn't distinguish between ideas and objects.
It gave me a sense of strangeness.
I know there are a lot of things which I doesn't understand yet.
And I will never understand all, of course.
Okaxile
`` Exile `` is the one of the most famous vocal groups in Japan.
But today, I'll introduce to you a very rare unit `` Okaxile ``.
The first person on this video is Okamura who is a member of Japanese comedy couple `` Ninety-nine ``
And he leads the dance in this song.
From what I hear, I don't know if it's true, he was a famous dancer in his hometown.
He joined Exile at this moment and danced with them.
He has a funny and interesting dance.
You can check other videos of Okaxile.
I hope you enjoy this video.
I'm really into this song recently.
This Youtube video has such a good symphony of music and such good images.
Cool!
I imagine only `` cool `` or `` awesome `` or `` dope ``.
December
Time flies like an arrow.
It is really thanks for my wife, who has started learning English.
We've really enjoyed this experience.
The fall in Korea
23rd October.
Suddenly, I've departed for DamYang, located in southern Korea, with my camera.
In my plan.
- First, I'll go to GwangJu by bicycle.
- Second, when I arrive on GwangJu, I stay a nigt in GwangJu.
- In the early moring next day, I depart for DamYang.
- And I visit Metasequoia street, Bamboo park, River forest and Bamboo museum.
But....
My plan was break down at second.
That's why my bicycle was stolen at GwangJu.
Inevitably, I had to go to DamYang by bus.
......
Althogh I failed my plan and I was lonely, I'm satisfied my travle because There is good landscape.
I'm attaching some of photo is I've taken in DamYang.
URL
I will show a soccer at midnight
Today is the Asia Champion League's first match.
My team will play in Kuwait at 10 PM, Kuwait time.
the new in the lang-8
Today, I become a member of lang-8.
I really need help.
My grammar is very poor, and my poor grammar always drives my SAT grammar teacher crazy.
And I will take the SAT2 on May 7th.
This is a little bite hard for me because I have to deal with the tasks in school those which surrounds the college entrance exam in China too.
So I want to find some friends on this web site to offer me some help.
Finished one of my jobs!!
My sister asked me to translate some documents into
Korean since its common in my sister's work place.
Luckily, I have some Korean friends so I worked on it while asking
my friends whether the translation is correct or not.
I was really really cautious at translating this because it's a national
related documents, which means I was not allowed to make
mistakes!!
I'm sure there were some mistakes.
It's impossible to grip the nuance perfectly since I'm Japanese.!
Oh..
this is just an excuse.
( laughing laughing)
Anyway I did my best and finished.
I feel so comfortable now!!!!!
Year!!!
Hello!
Keeping a diary is difficult for me.
I want to keep a diary everyday, but it is not a simple thing for me.
I know the reason, so I hope to correct the reason this time.
I also hope to improve my poor English ability this time.
Please correct my sentence or grammar.
I think my English ability is poor, so thank you very much for your advice.
Thank you!
Pizza
I ate a pizza for dinner yesterday
It was a margherita pizza.
I like cheeze and a basil.
I want to eat it again someday.
General roles for the timing to make money in the Tokyo stock exchange
I believe and we can make money by trading Tokyo stocks according to the following roles:
1.
Japanese stocks fall afternoon of Friday and get back every Monday morning, because many Japanese traders are more pessimistic than others.
So it is good time to buy stocks Friday afternoon and sell them Monday morning.
2.
The movement during the first 30 minutes after the stock market opening is controlled by the dominant tendency made by the US traders.
3.
The stock prices rise on the next days after Japanese national holidays, vacation weeks (April 29th to May 5th in spring ; around August 15th in summer ; 19th o 23th September in fall ; 28th December to 3rd January in winter).
So primarily we can buy stocks at the day just before the vacations and sell them at the next days after holidays except the year end.
In the case of the year end, we need to sell stocks whose quotes are lower than the original ones because we can reduce the capital gain tax by reporting the loss to the Japanese IRS.
4.
The best time for buying stocks is 10: 30 or 2: 30, whereas that for selling stocks is 9: 00 to 9: 05 or 2: 55 to 2: 59.
Today's lunch at McDonald' s
Today, I had lunch at McDonald's near my university with my friend.
We sat in outdoor seats.
So, I got sunburned a little.
I feel summer will come soon in Japan.
So, I hope that summer will pass quickly.
An interesting TV show aired last Saturday.
It was about what foreigners are wondering while they live in Japan.
It is natural for us, but they think it seems strange.
It is hanami.
In Japan, there are strange customs as mentioned above, like hanami.
During hanami, we have to find a place before starting.
Usually new employees are asked to sit on a blue sheet for hours to occupy a nice place.
It seems to be highest priority.
So, whenever I pass by, I am sure they must be new employees.
In black
Today, my country is raining.
Yesterday, I went to see.
It was very hot and dry.
All my rotations are interesting summer vacations.
Unfortunately, we have to finish term examinations.
Please give me power!
I can not come on here for around 2 weeks.
If a test is over, I will come again.
see you.
About my friend in Oshima
My friend works in Oshima.
Oshima is a small island nearest to Tokyo in Japan.
We were classmates in college as an undergraduate.
Two months ago I went Oshima to meet him.
He was fine but bored with his work.
Since few customers come there, he has nothing to do for a long time.
So he will try to study something in that time.
I recommended that he study English or Chinese with me.
I wish we were on lang-8.
wii
Now, the Wii is at my house.
My university friend forgot to take it home.
Spree from my house after an hour, so we'd like to play while drinking.
By the way, do you know' Lucky Taxi'?
I tried to make sentences. 1
Hello!!
Everyone!
Are these sentences correct?
Switch off the light when you go to bed.
I use an e-mail to keep in touch with my old friend.
Sadly, my dad is going bald recently. lol
Can anyone help?
The following is my friend's diary.
He is a junior high school student and studying English.
Can you give him any advice?
Sunday Feb 21
I got up at nine.
I ate rice and miso soup.
Today, I had a lot of free time.
So, I thought about what I would do.
Then, I remembered a very important thing.
That my room was very messy, because I' v been busy recently.
So, I worked very hard to clean my room.
I was really tired afterwards.
Tuesday Feb 23
I got up at seven.
I ate rice and miso soup.
I went to school.
Today first period was `` C.
T ``.
`` C.
T `` it was a challenging time.
Second period was English.
It's easy for me to study.
Third period was P.
E.
I enjoyed playing table tennis.
Fourth period was fine arts.
I don't like fine arts.
Fifth period was science.
I don't like science as well.
Sixth period was math.
I like math.
I went back home.
I then went to the park.
I enjoyed playing soccer and baseball with my friends.
I was very tired.
And also, can anyone answer this?
Which is correct?
1.
It's getting dark.
It may rain at any moment.
2.
I will (call by / call up / call off / call at) Tom to tell him that we are coming.
3.
Please lend me a pen to write with.
Thank you for reading!
It seems that I should teach my students at 8: 00 pm tonight.
When I went to school, today also there were only a few students in the classroom.
I'm no longer suprised about that situation.
All I want to know is the reason why they couldn't come to my calss.
I asked someone about the reason why they were not here.
He explaned the reason in Swahili, so I wasn't able to understand, but I realized that they were being punished.
Almost all students. 3 / 4.
Do you remember my journal entry that I wrote 2 days ago?
About the CHOTA MAJI.
So, They are turned over the progress of classwork.
As I was thinking what can I do to keep up with other class, one of the class member proposed to have a class at night.
I don't have any option, so it seems that I should teach my students at 8: 00 pm tonight.
When I was in Korea, if we skipped the class because of other affairs, they seemed very happy.
However, in here, my students don't want to skip the class.
Whenever I have a class at night (actually, sometimes we have an extra class at night like today), I was satisfied with my students who listened devouring every word.
I love my students~~~~~~~
Broken..
My MP4 is broken.
I can' t live without music!
So I have to dig out my first MP3 (1GB) out from my drawer.
But it can only input about two hundred and fifty songs.
When will my P4 come back~~~~???
The classes these days are difficult for me, so I have to study very hard..
I always stay there for a long time
By the way, listening to music there is also a good choice~ (ha, ha)
Do you take naps?
I'm always sleepy after eating lunch.
I used to lie down on the sofa after eating.
Recently I read a book about digestion.
According to the book, taking a nap is not good for digestion.
It says that even if we are sleepy after lunch, we should not sleep.
If we get very sleepy, we should go for a walk to forget about our sleepiness.
Finally I decided to try it.
After lunch today, I brought the book to the sofa and began to read it.
But two hours later I found I had been sleeping for that time.
After all that, I went to sleep today too.
I wonder if I will be able to stay up tomorrow.
The entrance exam season
The entrance exam season has arrived.
My sister took entrance exams a few days ago, and she's waiting for her results.
My brother will take it this Friday.
My sister is at a university, my brother is in high school.
I need to care for them.
The Sign of Recovery
Despite some analysts say that Japan has been at the bottom of the depression, I agree with the opinion that our country starts to show the sign of recovery from the damage caused by the earthquake.
There are two evidences for this: movements and discussions.
First, I can see some movements of peoples who have recovered from the damage now.
For example, there is the movement to buy the commodities made in Fukushima.
When the earthquake had happened, the economic activity was strongly depressed.
We thought that it was not good to have satisfied days when people in the damaged area have suffered.
Therefore, we stop buying commodities, especially luxuriant items.
As a result, the economy of Japan got stagnant.
Although that, we have already realized that the stagnant economy was even worst for the recovery of the Tohoku area.
We have to spur the economy to supply works and money in the area.
Because of this reason, the movement has happened.
Second, the discussions about the plans how we recover from the earthquake has been activated.
For instance, the usages of the area contaminated by the nuclear energy are now discussed on the Japanese newspapers frequently.
Some scientists advocate that that area should be used as the plants of the solar energy because the area is not good for living and there are a serious shortfall of electric energy.
Such discussions are able to be heard around Japan now.
All in all, Japan is trying to recover from the stunned situation now.
I hope Japan will recover from this situation and reply on other countries for their helps in the future.
Japan's energy policy
Because of the great big earthquake on March 11th, Japanese energy policies have changed drastically.
Many people claim that `` We should not use nuclear power plants!! ``
It's true that radiation impacts people, vegetables, soil, air and the sea.
However, I don't think that nuclear power plants should be stopped immediately.
According to today's newspaper, if we continue current policy, (now 34 power plants are stopped among 54) it is definitely Japanese economic make worse.
If we can't use electricity to the full extent, electricity fees will increase and some corporations might decide to move their factories to a foreign country.
If that happens, Japan's employment rate will face great difficulty.
Most Japanese people can't speak English.
So if we lose our employers, we can't get jobs!
The important point is `` order ``.
I agree that Japanese energy souse will change to natural resource but I advocate that our most important thing now on is to ensure of our electricity.
After that, we can change our electricity source into a natural one.
We shouldn't change our energy policy if we can't do it safely.
From this reason, I don't agree that nuclear power plant should stop immediately.
This is like the thing which Japanese wives often say: `` Which is more important? Me or your work?! ``.
It's the same kind of question.
tuition
I tutor a 9-grade student in math because of the upcoming senior high school entrance exam.
She always answers incorrectly at the same questions that I had taught several times, like a negative number multiplied by a negative number is a positive number.
After today's tuition, she will go to a karaoke with her classmates.
She just casually answered the questions and sort of appeared impatient, which made me sort of angry.
Yet, I have reflected on my behavior back home.
Not everyone is good at math or should be a mathematician or something like that.
I should have more patience.
Kinect the game with funny guys
At the July 4th party, one of my friends brought Kinect which is a body motion sensing gaming device for XBOX360.
I had heard of it before but I've never played it and neither had any one over there.
After playing beerpong, many people played with it but a funny thing happened on that day.
Two guys were competing against each other, racing in an athletic game.
Neither of them knew how exactly to run in the game.
One of the guy tried to run by lifting up his knees a lot and the others did not.
Actually, it requires lifting up their knees high enough to make the Kinect sensor to sense their move, so he was correct and had fastest speed in the race.
However, the problem is he was a bit too serious so he started moving toward the TV monitor little by little, then finally he slipped on a floor and fell down.
As a result, suddenly he became 7th in the race which is the second from last.
On the other hand, while he is running seriously is falling down, the other guy is keep running, but since he did not lift his knees up, so he kept the booby in the race-until the other guy fell down.
So, the race turned out really funny since one guy fell down and the other guy ran at a slow pace.
They ended up getting 7th and 8th.
Everyone started laughing and I was feeling like it was a documentary of a race with a guy who didn't give up even though he fell down in a middle of the race and a guy who kept running slowly but never gave up.
Anyway, it's a one of funniest moment ever.
Be careful running even though it's a game.
:)
The happiest day of the week
I feel happy when Friday night comes.
The reason is very simple: I don't have to worry whether I can awake in the morning the next day.
These days, this is becoming the happiest moment for me.
^ ^ It seems like nothing, but it brings very real happiness to me.
Thanks to my current boss, I'm enjoying my work although I have tons of it.
He's really good at asking someone to do work.
I want to get his techniques someday.
At the same time, I want to learn how to say no gently because I want to have much happier moments other than sleeping in the morning!
^ ^
My little sister.
I have two sisters and one brother.
I'm their elder sister.
And today our youngest sister has her sixth birthday.
I don't know what gifts my parents prepared.
I sewed her a new coverlet (I don't know which word to choose.
It's covered bed over all other sings, like blanket).
In the evening we will have a little barbecue.
Many children like fried sausages very much.
And of course, some of our friends will be here with their kids.
UW
UW stands for University of Washington, which is located in a beautiful city named Seattle.
I am here attending in a class that is ARW4.
Before I went to school this morning, I spent one hour jogging around a big lake called Green Lake near my neighborhood.
It's one of my regular hobby and sometimes it's hard for anyone who can not believe a girl who does this kind of work everyday, but I do exacully.
Balloon lecturer.
`` OMOCHA OUKOKU `` is an amusement park.
The main lecturer was `` DOISAN `` from `` MAGIC POT ``.
`` MAGIC POT `` is my office.
Although today was a rainy day, many people participated in the balloon lecture.
Almost all of the audience was comprised of families.
It was difficult to lecture to small children.
I Miss You In Loneliness
Every time I go home, she always says: `` Oh, my son!
You are so thin, more than ever! `` And then she makes great food for me.
Then I think of my father.
When I was about 7 years old, I went to a primary school in town and lived with my father in his school.
Grandma made me human and Father made me a person.
While I was 16, I did a lot of bad things, but they never abandoned me.
So here I want to tell you how much I love them.
Rota Island
Last week, I traveled to Rota Island.
It is a small island between Saipan and Guam.
Actually I have been there eleven times!
I have some friends in Rota.
Every time I come to Rota, they always say `` welcome back! ``.
They invite me to their BBQs, picnics and to their hunting trips!!
This time, they took mecoconut crab hunting.
It was a really exciting experience.
Coconut crabs are active at night so we went to a coconut forest at night.
It was yummy!!
Ideal and reality
There is a big difference between what is ideal and realistic.
It's not easy to shorten the long distance between them.
Sometimes, you will have to accept something hard or bitter in your life.
I've never experienced life this hard before.
I have too much stress in my everyday life.
I will try to make the gap between my ideal and realistic life short, but it's not going well lately even a little bit.
I think I need to be more patient and tolerant towards everything I will be facing in the future.
The only person who can change yourself is you.
I could put my stress away a little bit by writing a journal...
Hi (* ^ ^ *)
Good morning (* ^ ^ *)
I am Yuu.
I'm just beginning Lang-8.
Please get along well!!
I live in Japan.
I'm a woman.
My hair is not black.
because, I color it:)
I will have strengthened muscles for spring vacation
I felt bad.
I went to the gym in Neyagawa city so that I can strengthen my muscles.
Maybe, I don't have as much muscle as the average man.
So I want to strengthen my muscles.
Later around 5pm, I went to work at Lowson, which is a convenience store.
Work was easy today, because of the rain.
That is to say, when it is rainy people are reluctant to go out.
heartbreak T.
T
I was upset last night, so I went out for some fresh air.
My boyfriend often condemneds me for being against him.
So I try not to oppose his suggestions, but I felt it is useless.
No matter how much of an effort I make, he never changes his mind.
This made me hurt, so I went for a walk for a while but he text-messaged me' You don't have to come back!
Leave me forever!'
I was very sad.
T.
T
Tuesday, January 4, 2011
Today, I'm so happy.
Morning on n's pas a sepiaindre letter.
Mom do hold food.
so.
I make folded egg.
I made folded egg make carefully.
My sister made eggs.
My sister side on, me help.
So, I completed the eggs.
Finished as mom came in the house.
Mom batted an eyelid.
So we all ate, and it was delicious.
So, good feeling
I'm bad at remembering.
The restaurant is near my friend's house.
You and I came here once before! ``
A bad day
Hi!!
I'm happy today, but people seem as if they were very very angry.
When I was walking by the street, two cars were going to kill me!
xD
And people seem as if they were constipated (this word is funny because in Spanish `` constipado `` is `` cold ``, and it's easy to mistake the meaning xD).
But I've been happy, and I've seen a teacher that was happy too.
This is gorgeous 8)
...
In other news: I've finished my sculpture!
At last!
And this is a secret present for my dad xP
Good day for everyone!!
Celia ^ u ^
Sleep
I can't sleep too long, which will me dizzy.
However, if I don't get enough sleep, I feel depressed.
On Sunday, there were no activities and no plans.
It was supposed to be a good time to sleep longer.
However, I still got up on time as usual.
I tended to sleep as much as I could when I was younger.
Sleep quality seems to be more important than the time.
Answer
I've been wondering why I want to study English.
Then tonight I got a part of answer.
I will arrange my thought in English and write down here as soon as possible.
I have a feeling that is different from others.
But I suppose everybody has a reason why they want to study a second language.
I think everybody has a different reason.
I feel happy that I've got my answer.
I want to study hard to prove my answer.
summer holiday
I made invoices for this month and sent it on this morning.
Today's work has ended.
In (???), my summer holiday started today.
I have taken a week off.
What a happy person am I:-)
I'll go on a trip to Kyushu Japan next monday.
We plan 2 nights 3 days trip.
I can't wait until Monday!!!
I remember that when I was child, I could not sleep at night before an excursion.
Music and my father
My father was once a DJ in a club during his youth, so he got many LP records and CDs.
I could come into contact with a lot of music, from Billboard to Classics, because of it.
Actually, I was truly the blessed one.
As you may or may not know, my father's generation was absolutely poor.
Right after the Korean War, there was nothing left.
Everything was completely destroyed, including music.
But there were US Armed Forces in Korea, and they radio broadcast their Billboard songs.
My father listened to those songs from the radio everyday and recorded them (which is illegal these days...) and dreamed of his future.
Even though he couldn't eat his fill, he was happy filling with music.
He spent all of his money to buy the records or a guitar (or guitars).
Anyways, I got his blood in my veins, and I'm really into the music also.
And I'm really grateful what he inherted me.
Both emotionally and physically.
Those records he bought during his youth are now real valuable stuff:)
My Skill
My English skill is not very good.
so that I have studied for two years,
but now I have not skill of english.
pls let me kwon about to study other langage....
A letter from someplace in Tokyo
Well, I'm gon na talk about myself a little bit.
Since I've been to London, I like London very much.
Thank you.
Wedding Reception
I went to the wedding reception of my relative yesterday.
The bridegroom is my brother's wife's younger brother.
He's very good at basketball, and has won a championship in a 3 on 3 basketball competition in Kyushu.
The bride read a letter for her parents, which is often included in Japanese-style wedding receptions, and the letter was very touching.
I remembered my own reception, my starting point yesterday.
( Question ; which preposition is more appropriate, `` for `` or `` to `` in line 5?)
What Would You Do If You were Stressed Out?
These days, I'm stressed out because of work.
These days I'm easily pissed off regarding tiny things.
Anyway, I made a list of ways to reduce stress. You can see them below.
1.
Eating sweets.
2.
Falling asleep
3.
Playing musical instruments.
4.
Watching movies
5.
The easiest way is eating sweets.
But I'm afraid I'll gain weight.
It would be sad if I got chubby because of being stressed.
If I had no sweets during hard work, I would suffer from stomach ache because the more stress I have, the more gastric acid my stomach creates.
I don't know which is worse. Gaining weight or having an aching stomach.
It's a catch-22 situation for me.
lol.
Speaking of falling asleep, it's the best way for me to reduce the stress.
Nevertheless, it is not appropriate to sleep because of time constraints.
When it comes to another ways, it's impossible to do these at the office.
Dear Lang-8 friends, what would you do when you're under stress?
I'm want to hear about it.
As always, thanks for reading my entry.
My Old PC Revived!!
Last month, I received an old laptop computer from my mother, because she bought a new computer.
But the running of the PC installed Windows XP is very slow...
^ ^ ; ;
So I installed a new OS called `` Ubuntu ``, which is a Linux distribution and free. It does seem alot faster than the former operating system.
As a result, It worked. ^ o ^ /
The PC running Ubuntu is running as well as any new PC.
I am writing this entry on it while listening to music.
Maybe, Microsoft will have a problem in the future?
I'm going to translate my blog
I decided to translate my travel blog into English.
This way I'm going to achive two goals.
First I will improve my English skills, and secondly I'll have a blog in English
Because in the past people often asked me if I have a blog.
I replied, `` Yes I have one, but in Russian ``. So I think it's time to create an Englishversion.
today
I am a college student.
I live in Chongqing.
Today is a special day.
I am very upset and I feel very tired.
I have no ideas.
Difficulty of Drug's Name resembling Abracadabra
Drugs' name's are difficult to pronounce.
Usually, can a native English speaker pronounce difficult drug names
such as `` Diethylstilbestrol `` or `` Ibritumomab tiuxetan ``?
For instance, when you saw an article in today's newspaper about a drug,
Can you pronounce it at first glance without consulting a dictionary or website, etc.?
By chance, can you pronounce them correctly only by recognizing the alphabet?
In the case of Japanese, we can not pronounce some Kanji.
I commonly used to ask my family, `` What's pronunciation of this ``?
Home stay
My son left for Australia last night.
That is his first homestay.
I didn't know whether he's worried about it or is looking forward to it, but I hope that it will be a special and wonderful experience for him.
I practice for making stories these days.
I practice writing stories with some words and phrases that I studied today.
I wrote a story, today.
> > >
Kim Yu-Na is one of the few Koreans who succeed at an early age in the world.
Her great success is based on her strong will.
The whole world is keenly interested in her walk of life.
Recently, she was appointed as the U.
S Sports Academy's 2010 Female Athlete of the year.
Congratulations on your winning!
Hmm..
I don't know how to make a sentence with' have close ties with' in the story.
I won't accept this.
When I went to school today,
Our teacher was angry because recently many people were bringing things like chocolates, or their cell phones to class.
But I never bring these things.
So I am innocent.
But my teacher said `` If you find a person with anything like chocolates or a cell phone, you are responsible for warning the person.
If you turn a blind eye to it, then you are also responsible. ``
But I was unconvinced, because I think that those people will not listen to a warning anyway.
Washing pedometer
I am always wearing my pedometer.
Every day, I look forward to recording the distance I have walked.
Yesterday, I took off my pants leaving pedometer in the pants pocket.
My wife washed it without knowing the pedometer was in the pocket.
After washing, the pedometer didn't work.
Previously she washed the iPOD I accidentally left in my pocket, after that it didn't work anymore.
My wife said `` You are wrong for leaving something in the pocket. ``
``
I said `` You are bad to wash my clothes without checking the pockets first. ``
Who is wrong?
First challenge for EIKEN examination pre grade 1, part1
I will take an English exam on June 12th.
This examination's name is `` EIKEN. ``
EIKEN is a popular English exam for Japanese people.
I think that the EIKEN exam is made by Japanese people for compulsory education students.
Of course, usual adults are also able to take the exam.
The TOEIC examination is probably the standard English examination all over the world.
I feel TOEIC is more difficult than EIKEN.
I want evidence of learning English.
And then, I will take the EIKEN exam.
Achooooooooooooooo!!!!!!!!!
I just can't stop sneezing today because of hay fever. (+ _ +) I take medicine every morning, but it doesn't work these days. |
How can I spend spring time more confortable??
Jogging
My hobby is jogging.
Today, I ran about 5km along the river.
Jogging makes me feel very comfortable.
According to brain science, Jogging raises serotonin levels.
If you feel depression, it might be good to jog especially in the sunny day!
kamakura
I visited Hase temple.
Many people visit there.
Piano
They was good players.
My two host brothers were playing piano.
The older host brother got second prize!
I think that that competition was big.
It's the Spring drizzle. I don't mind to get soaked through...?
I heard someone on TV said `` It's the Spring drizzle. I don't mind to get soaked through ``.
Not sure because it is long ago, when a servant put up an umbrella for his master, the master replied the words to the servant.
It is raining right now.
I have a marathon to run today.
I don't like running in the rain very much for sure.
That is why I said so as above.
Umm, okay, okay, It is just a Spring drizzle, I will run soaking through it!
today
I went to sinzyuku with my family.
Then, I bought a notePC at Big Camera.
So, I wrote this diary whit it!!
It was very difficulet when I tried to set up this PC.
So, my father helped me.
I want to use my PC well.
I will practice with it!
Is environmental protection compatible with economic growth?
In this day and age, economic growth often comes with the improvement of technology.
Thus, it's hard to say our prosperities in developed countries are compatible with environmental protection.
However, apparently, this is cahnging.
A lot of companies began to come up with the ways technology and a lot of commodities can go with environment.
In some cases, there could be `` greenwash ``.
However, raised awareness is getting rid of this trend as consumers are more eager to purchase authentic eco-friendly commodities.
Even though I say it myself (what?), I'm using some soaps that don't contain chemical substances.
I heard that some detergents can be harmfull when they are drained into the river or ocean, rendering local people unable to avoid some dangers from the pollution.
From the looks of it, eco-concious might be the watchword from years to come. (What?)
insomnia
Yesterday evening I had insomnia. My mind is a mess and full of all things!
Climbing
Hi everyone.
Thank you for always correcting my mistakes.
------------------------------
2009 / 03 / 12
In order to drink, I finished my work early.
I drank with my co-workers after a long. time.
But, one of them was on leave. So, hecouldn't meet with us.
I had a really good time with them.
But I felt as if I should help him in some way.
Maybe if I could talk to him about his problem, he might not be on leave because of it.
------------------------------
2009 / 03 / 13
I went to the rock climbing gym.
I could climb more than last time because my hip's getting better.
I was really happy.
I felt that health is the most important thing for humans.
------------------------------
2009 / 03 / 14
I couldn't wake up early this morning.
I was tired, nevertheless, I went to the gym.
I'm happy being able to go to the climbing gym.
Because I could meet my friends whom I am always eager to meet.
Afamous Japanese climber named Yuji accomplished many feats there.
I tried some new challenges but they weretoo difficult for me.
After all, I didn't manage to pass level five of the challenge.
------------------------------
2009 / 03 / 15
I joined the English conversation club.
This is my sixth time joining this club.
I can't speak English well.
Speaking English is more difficult than listening and writing English.
I had met a man who was good at English very well.
I'd like to see him again.
Then, I went to the climbing gym.
At last, I could climb the level five of challenge and almost yellow 11th.
I was really happy.
I went drinking with Nobu afterword.
I had a really great day.
A thief opened his gyvewitha note and killed himself withhis shoelace
A thief died in the police station.
An official on behalf of the police station said to the mediathat he killed himself withhis shoelace after opening his gyve witha notethat was in hishand.
This news made me so happy.
I'm glad to see the official is so imaginative.
Here comes a 5 day vacation for the New Year, but I don't know what to do during these days.
Smoking
I stopped smoking two weeks ago.
I started to smoke since last year and I didn't like cigarettes so much that I thought I would stop it easily...
But I know that I need to smoke really now!
I want cigarettes more than meals.
I'm not as irritable so much now but I gained 6kg since then / also and sometimes I wanna eat foods that I didn't eat before.
It's a little scary.
So I'll try to find things I like [ more / to do better ] and I have to go on a diet!
Annoying Haneul.
It seems that it has been a very hard day for me today.
It was because I felt gloomy unconsciously.
I don't know the reason on why I was so annoyed about everything.
Was it just because I have lots of lessons?
I got out of temper to my friends as much as I felt sorry for her.
She understands me well because we are best friends.
Sometimes, ther are little changes for me, Today seems to be the very day.
As tomorrow is a school holiday, I'll take a rest at home comfortably.
Hey
If someone is gloating too much.
May I say, ``
1.
You are exaggerating too much.
2.
You are exaggerating too much.
3.
You are overstating.
4. what you say is exagerated.
5. what you say is overstated,
Thanks.
I am in Wuhan now
It took me 7 hours to drive from Shiyan to Wuhan. I am very tired, but when I think that I will see my dear brother here tomorrow morning, I am so happy!
I like K-Pop
Hi! jejjeje... (^. ^)
I really like K-Pop. My favorites groups are ss501, Super Junior, C.
N.
Blue, 2NE1, and Girls' Generation....
I try to do a paragraph in English, but it's so difficult.....
Life is ups and down.
Sometimes you feel upset.
Sometimes you feel happy.
Every day you have a different feeling.
so, keep going.
haha
English party
I went to a party yesterday.
A lot of people were there to talk in English.
A Swedish man, Chinese men, a Russian woman, some people
from other countries, and many Japanese people.
We had a lot of fun together.
They could speak English fluently, which made me think that
I have to learn more.
somebody please correct this writing TT
I have decided to start writing for a Teacher's exam next winter.
year.
I've heard that The United States introduced a system that rates the teacher' s
ability.
What I thought was the most interesting, was that this system assesses teachers with students scores.
I don't think students scores should be the standard for an establishment.
When we set a standard to appraise something, we should avoid being open to dispute.
We do need absolute criterion.
In my opinion teachers must be assessed by their teaching ability itself.
For example, varieties of teaching methods and materials should be involved in the criterion for assessing the teachers.
A plant named WARABI in Japanese is one of ferns and eatable
A fern is a unique group of plants.
A fern does not start from a seed and does not flower.
A fern begins to grow on the structure named prothallus, which is green and whose shape is similar to a heart mark, and a fern is brought up / / will be brought up through a lot of complex events. / / tense consistency
If you want to know this complex event entirely, please check wikipedia or some books.
Unlike mosses, ferns have vascular bundles of xylems and phloems.
This is why ferns are more closely related to usual plants such as a wheat or poplar than mosses.
By the way, I'll introduce a traditional Japanese food called `` warabi `` in Japanese.
A `` warabi `` is one of ferns.
Generally speaking, a `` warabi `` is inedible, but its young stem is edible if you cook it correctly.
A `` warabi ``'s unique taste reminds almost all Japanese of spring because a `` warabi `` is one of the spring foods.
Anemia
Today, I was diagnosed with anemia.
When I had a basis check-up at the company,
I was told to go to a hospital to have another check-up.
The result of my check-up was also anemia.
I have to get the iron by injection, 20 times as a treatment
as of today. (ToT)
It will be tough for me!!!
Happy New Year in 2011
Happy New Year, everyone!
How was your new year's day?
I have been staying at my in-law's house these past three days to spend our new year's days with them.
I got `` Otoshidama `` from both my husband and my in-laws this morning.
After I enjoyed having `` Osechi `` with my family, I went to a temple called `` Tatebetaisha `` as `` Hatsumoude `` with my family.
I prayed for our family's good luck there.
And then, I reported my new year's resolution.
My new year's resolution is here.
1.
I would love to read 48 books in English.
This year I completed 24 books in English.
So, this year I want to try to double the amount of books.
I know it is very difficult because my reading level is less than other comprehension skills' level.
However, I really want to improve my reading skill.
2.
I would like to paint 10 artworks a month.
I also want to create my art blog in English and post my artwork constantly.
3.
Of course, I really would love to improve my English comprehension skills further.
I want to become able to express my thoughts, opinions and feelings with natural expressions as native English speakers do.
After I got home and checked my mails with my PC, I realized that my Michigan painting friend registered my May classes.
I am planning to go to Michigan in May to take two painting classes.
In one class I would love to learn how to paint portrait.
According to my friend's mail, my class choice was very good.
She told me that I will be able to lots of new things from two classes.
I am really looking forward to going to America again.
Before I will go there, I would like to develop my English comprehension skills further.
The first diary
Today I joined Lang-8 and this is my first English diary here.
I found this website when I read a magazine for English learners in Japan.
I still don't know how to use this website, which is very complex for me to understand.
But I think this system is wonderful for every language learner, so I want to learn a lot with it.
Back from NY and Boston.
Hi,
I've just come back to Japan from Boston and New York.
Boston and NY was nice.
I visited several clients during the day time and we went to some restaurants and bars at night.
I want to go to Boston and NY again.
hide-pierre
* * * * * * * * *
It is getting warm in Vancouver lately!
Summer is coming:) I can hardly wait!!
I want to do hundreds of things.
I also need to work, though.
I have gotten used to work ; therefore, I enjoy working much more.
It is sometimes hard because of my poor English ; however I have truly good experiences *. By the way, I moved into a new house last Saturday.
Actually, it was my fifth time moving...
I hope this will be my last house even though I have had bad luck with houses.
This one is very nice because it is cute and clean!!
It used to be a garage.
The owner renovated it into a nice house.
There is a kitchen, a bathroom and two bedrooms just for my friend and I: D For now I am living with the previous tenant, but my friend is going to move in next Sunday!
I am really looking forward to it.
Thesedays, I have not studied very much...
I realized that my writing skills are getting worse..
Well, I am planning to go to school again in September!!
I should keep writing everyday, really!!!!
I am going to go back to Japan in February.
I want to get much better skills before then...
I hope I do my best: P
I'm going to tell my boss that I will quit:)
I have got a new job, so I'm going to tell my boss that I am quiting.
Yesterday I tried to tell him / her, but I couldn't find a good time.
I will do it on monday for sure:)
Good luck me!!!
Director and homestay
I have become the director of a company now.
It is going to start on the 1st Feb.
I must be busy, but I can not earn enough money.
I just want to consider a vision for my future.
I do not live my life with a lot of excuse.
By the way
My English friend now is staying at my house in Japan as a homestay.
We have been drinking so much alcohol everyday.
He might put on weight!!
His wife might be a little bit angry when he goes back to London.
Such a great fun days.
Tiny writing
Is it correct?
My goal is becoming a veterinarian.
And I consider Basic Studies in Natural Sciences as a strong, varied science base and an international experience for admission to a vet school.
Interdisciplinary, practical studies, a wide choice of courses, experimental spirit (?) and open-mindedness are reasons why I am so enthusiastic about RU.
Death
Today my friend ` s father has died.
Our class went to see him.
Before I have seen his father once or twice, but everybody who has been on the burial has felt the devastation and so did I.
Today is a very sad day.
I got a new favorite item.
It is a pencil sharpener.
It's so cute!
First try.
Hello!
My name is Natasza.
I've just found this page and decided to start to write my diary here.
I've been learning English for about 9 years with a 4 year break, but I've never had contact with people who speak English. So I think that in my future posts you will find lots of polish influence.
My idea for a life, I think, is to make all dreams come true doing everything that I can at the moment.
I hate living in one place and doing the same thing everyday.
My favourite subjects are maths and physics, so probably I will have a problem with connecting them with traveling or something like that.
But recently I heard about charity organizations which need engineers and it could be a nice idea.
:)
I arrived at Singapore.
I departed NARITA airport at 11: 30 for Singapore.
I spend slept and ate lunch in airplain about seven hour.
Singapore airline was find service to be Satisfactory.
I was relaxed.
but I feel tired because of difference temperature between Singapore and Japan.
I slept long last night.
Singapore is in the rainy seasons.
It was raining when I arrived at Changi airport.
I ` m looking forward to the day when my school starts =)
composition (4)
I am practicing writing compositions to improve my writing ability for the GEPT examination.---------
If you are studying, you wouldn ` t want someone to bother you.
Last night, Jenny was studying for a test.
But her neighbor, Mr.
Lin was having a party.
That maked noisy.
Jenny just called the police.
The police went to Mr.
Lin ` s home and said to him `` It is very late, don ` t make noisy. `` Finally, it was become quite, and Jenny could study.
Thank you
If I were an animal, which animal would I be?
If I were an animal, I would be a cat!!
Actually, I love cats!
They are small, cute and lovely.
When a cat say `` myao~ ``, I fall in love with the cat.
Please let me be a cat!
If I can be a cat, I will go out for a walk the whole day, sleep until I feel good, be along with people when I lonely.
Oh,,, I love a cat and I would be a cat! (*' v' *)
The Reptile Room From A Series of Unfortunate Events
I finished reading the second book of the series `` A Series of Unfortunate Events `` in English.
The book's title is `` The Reptile Room ``.
The book is my another Floridian friend's recommendation, and I am a fan of the author, `` Lemony Snicket ``.
That is because I think that his books have not been translated into Japanese yet.
So, if I would love to read his books, I definitely have to read his books in English.
I love reading such kinds of books.
The book series has thirteen episodes, so I really would love to conquer all of them.
However, I can not keep a motivation about reading.
That is my weakness.
Meanwhile, in the second book the orphan siblings straggled against their enemy, Count Olaf again.
Compared to the first book, the second one is more complicated.
I enjoyed reading it much more.
I guess in all series, the youngstarts will straggle their enemy, and in the last book they will win.
Since the book series are for children, it is easy for me to guess the story lines.
Right now I am reading another type of book.
I would love to finish reading it in three days.
Graviation
Something came down from the sky.
As soon as I saw it fall, I discovered it was a walnut.
It was split open and rolling in the road.
Suddenly, something flew down to get the walnut.
I noticed that a crow dropped the walnut from his beak to the ground in order to break the shell.
How clever!!
The crow must have known gravity existed before we came to understand it.
This happened on one of my busy days, so I felt happy.
summer colds
Nowadays the weather is so hot!
It's like a steamer outside but inside it is very cold because of the airconditioner.
You may think I make absurd remarks, but I'm getting sick and tired of using the
airconditioner.
I hate its winds.
When season summer, I am certainly catch a summercold.
It's so ridiculous!
I think we should economize energy.
We should only turn on an air conditioner whenever needed and in moderation.
Gran Torino
Recently, I watched' Gran Torino' directed and starred by Clint Eastwood on TV.
It was a great film.
I think this is one of Clint Eastwood best films.
In the beginning of this summer, I met his son, Kyle Eastwood, in the big book shop in Paris.
They were having a lecture about his music career.
He played the contra bass and the guitar.
His music is played at the end of Gran Trino.
He was very nice guy and handsome.
Hello world!
Hi everyone...!
My name is Martina, I'm 19 years old and Italian.
I found out about this website yesterday, and this is my very first entry journal here.
I am in my first year of university and I'm currently studying English and Japanese as main subjects.
I've always loved learning new languages and these are definitely the ones that I like the most.
I actually think I'm in love with English and everything related to it since I first started studiying it in Elementary school...
I really enjoy learning new words ad expressions and when I don't know the right way to say something or the right word for something you'll literally see me running towards the dictionary and grabbing it as soon as I can!
yes, sometimes I'm quite obsessed ahaha.
As far as Japanese is concerned, It's always attracted me in a way and so, since my town has one of the best language insitutes in Italy (can you say that about a university? I don't know..) I've decided to study this charming language. Yes you can say that
I'm going to try and write also in Japanese, although my vocabulary and grammar are obviously very poor at the moment. = P
Well, I hope to meet new people and I can't wait to learn many new things and get many corrections in order to improve my English (and my Japanese, too!).
See you soon! = D
CHANGE
Today, I get up early because I decide to change myself.
Since summer vacation started, I always stayed up to play computer games and even until AM13: 00.
Besides, little exercise made me gainweight, so I want to go to the gym and go on a diet.
Do you know your enemy?
This title comes from my favorite song sung by Green day, one of many US bands.
As they said, It's essential for you to know your enemy which causes you trouble.
As for me, Today's enemy is untidy fat around my stomach!
A few weeks ago, I went to Australia for sightseeing.
( I'll also write this episode soon)
The travelling (Trip) was very enjoyable, but I ate high-calorie meals many times during my trip.
( In particular, on the plane to Australia, flight crews kindly served me meals five times)
After I came back to Japan, my weight increased by more than three kg before I left.
And I haven't change the troublesome part of my body yet.
Recently I read a book about body control.
It emphasized that it's important that the calories you consume must be high or equivalent against that you take in.
That's why I decided to eat low-calorie foods and to go jogging everyday.
Then there were good things and bad things.
The former is that Japan has a lot of low-calorie and delicious foods like udon or buckwheat.
The latter is that going outside in winter as much as possible is not normal behavior!
How to create English friend?
I'm looking for a friend who is native English Speaker.
Because I'd like to my English skill up.
I was recommended to go to bar of pub where foreign people go to.
However I don't have much courage to go to pub and talk to unknown person with my cheap English.
I'm thinking that Lang-8 might be a good way to meet someone who speaks native English.
Please let me know.
In exchange, I can teach them Japanese!
chatting with friends
I had school for five days until today, and it finished, so I can enjoy chatting with friends I met on this web site.
Even if I had school the next day I chatted, but I was a little sleepy at school the next day, so I decided to sleep longer.
Six days ago, I took a long nap for about five hours and sat up late.
When I was enjoying chatting at about 3-ish, I considered going to bed, but I thought if I went to bed once I wouldn't be able to wake up at 6 and continued chatting till I went to school.
I was a bit sleepy at school, so I decided not to do that again.
From today, I'm free and can enjoy chatting at night!
Japanese business man
Almost all japanese businessmen use the train.
Some of them browse the net on their mobiles, some read some books, and others sleep on the train.
Sometimes those who are seated lean against me.
And they're heavy.
I think they are very tired at their office, because of having to work so much
So they want to sleep as much as possible.
But I don' tlike to be weighed.
And if they are drunk, it's the worst situation.
Today peoplesitting next to me were.
I was very tired, while moving to my school.
First Diary
I'm a Japanese woman.
I want to express my thoughts in English.
I decided that this year, I'm going to write a diary every day, and I'll get my English corrected by people on Lang-8.
I want to go to England to see my friend.
She is Japanese, and works as a nanny in England.
So, I want to speak in English to her.
Plant a young tree
Yesterday father and I planted some young trees.
We went to the shop, where we bought some trees.
There are five kinds of trees which are about one or two-years old.
They're maples, vines, and some korean native kinds of trees.
Before we went to our garden to plant, we went to a restaurant for lunch.
Then we met my eldest sister and her husband by chance in the restaurant.
My broter-in-law, who's name is Mr.
Park, joined.
And we planted trees and cleaned the garden.
It took about two hours to finish.
I thought we couldn't plant trees in a day without his help.
I was lucky yesterday!
First Day in Lang-8
Yesterday, a friend of mine recommended this website to me.
So I registered and logged in.
To a new comer like me, it is a really interesting and useful website.
I feel very regretful to have missed it in the past.
I find what most appeals to me is that one can improve his or her ability in a foreign language while / making new friends from all over the world.
That is fascinating!
UP
`` UP `` is a very famous movie in Taiwan.
We need to put on 3D glasses to see this movie.
This Disney cartoon was very funny and amazing to us.
My mom, younger sister, and I decided to go to see the movie this morning.
The tickets are expensive because they include 3-D glasses to see the movie.
I love Disney movies.
hot spring
I went to a hot spring today.
It occurred to me that Japanese people don't hesitate to take a bath with others, but we are shy to talk with foreigners.
Maybe Japanese is never thinking if we make a mistake without talking with.
I think that's why Japanese are shy.
What do you think about this?
Rikako
Go to U.
S.
A
An annual meeting of neuroscience society will be held from the next Saturday to Wednesday in Chicago.
To attend the meeting, I'll go to Chicago.
This is the first time to go to U.
S.
A for me.
And I have never been on international flight alone.
I know almost nothing about international travelling!
And sometime people say `` U.
S.
A is dangerous! ``
So, I'm really anxious about this trip.
But, of course, I expect to have a good time.
I hope this trip is fun.
This is a good chance for me.
I'll enjoy Chicago!
I love reading!
I love reading.
I always carry a paperback and read it while I am commuting or when I am free at school.
Today I bought a book by Morimi Tomihiko at the bookstore in my college, where all the college students and teachers can buy books at a five percent discount off the regular price.
( The bookstore is called' Seikyou' in Japanese.
Most of the Japanese colleges have such bookstores.) The title of the book is' Kitsune No Hanashi.' (' Kitsune No Hanashi' means' A story about a fox.') I find the story very mysterious.
I don't think Morimi Tomihiko is well known through out the world, so let me explain who he is.
Morimi Tomihiko is a Japanese novelist.
He graduated from Kyoto University with a major in agriculture.
Now he lives in Kyoto and the settings of most of his novels are in Kyoto.
Although many of the main characters in his novels are dull college students, his literary style is very colorful and sophisticated!
Most of his stories can be categorized as magical realism fiction.
In Japan, his books are very popular among young people, especially college students.
Whenever I read his books, I am fascinated by his wonderful literary style.
Furthermore, his stories are very enjoyable.
The characters in his stories are somehow likeable.
Anyway, I am fond of his books.
But I'm afraid his books are very difficult to translate into other languages.
In fact, all his books are remained to be translated into foreign languages.
I'm going to finish reading' Kitsune No Hanashi' today.
, After that, I have to concentrate on preparing for next Sunday's STEP test!
I'm a little nervous.
I'm Reading Excel Binaries
Because I want to draw CHARTS in excel using python, I'm reading Microsoft Excel binaries.
Its format is so complex:-(
The Excel binary format is known as `` Compound Document ``.
It is sequences of 512 bytes blocks (= `` sector ``).
The first sector is a `` header sector `` that points to the `` dictionary sector ``, and to data structures like the FAT (file allocation table) in the FAT16 / 32 filesystem.
The directory sector points head of `` Stream ``.
sequences by some sectors made byte stream.
The byte stream is a sequence of BIFF Records.
Busyyyyy
I couldn't write my diary last week because I was busy and tired for my part-time job.
I had never had exprerience of a hall stuff member before, so I always be tensed up during working.
Recently, I felt a little relax because I got accustomed to working as a hall stuff member.
Today is the most busy in my experience days.
I could not only have a break but drink a glass of water.
I was really thirsty and tired.
After working, I drank water soon and went back my house to eat something.
I went to bed after eating soon.
Tomorrow, I have a work as a hall stuff member but I have a day off after tommorrow, so I can not stand it.
See ya tomorrow.
What is Bush's advantage?
The US president Bush will finish his term in office soon.
I've always thought he is really incapable and dull.
As you know, an Iraqi reporter threw his shoes at Bush at a press interview in Baghdad.
That scene was aired on TV repeatedly.
study
Next month, I will be attending a college.
I don't know what to do, so I am not studying at all.
I've become foolish.
THE TENNIS
I belong to a tennis club.
I usually play tennis six times a week.
I can't play tennis well.
But I like to play tennis.
I want to be a good tennis player.
Bakery Day
Today, I bought two bread at my favorite bakery.
The one in the background is unknown, because I have forgotten what was printed on the name tag of it.
It was a sandwich.
The front is a small bun with cream cheese and walnut.
The sandwich costs 280yen. I ate that one first.
My coworker told me it is great!
Indeed, it was yummy.
This is a french bread with cheese, maybe raw ham with spice and lettuce.
I probably can't get raw ham at ordinary stores.
It tastes high-grade, hum! + lolwut? +
But the bread was a little of hard, I am aching my chin a little now.
Holiday
Today is monday. I just finished my holiday and arrived back from my hometown.
Now I'm working in my company and I feel a little tired. Maybe I enjoyed too much during this holiday, so I can't acclimatize myself to different place or people, etc.
I think in a few daysI will be fine. (`` can get right `` sounds awkward and unclear)
So bad
Recently, I've been feeling really bad.
when I do anything I always will meet troule.
That makes me feel very bad.
I think I need time to relax to help me fix this problem.
So I will do more exercise to relax.
I think I can make this problem go away.
Christmas present
I was on day duty today.
I dropped in at a department store at Nihombashi on my way back home.
The purpose was to buy a Christmas present.
After four days, I hold a Christmas party.
I will exchange with my friends presents gathered by us.
It costs about 1000 Yen per present.
I was at a loss for a while, but I bought a shoes-keeper that include deodorizers.
I hope my friends will be pleased with my present.
Draft summary of a writing assigment (1)
This may be boring to those who do not like technical topics:)
-------
English pronunciation
I have worked for an American company for 4 years.
All of my colleagues are bilingual.
Of course, each have different levels of English proficiency, but my company requires that each person scores at least 730 points on the TOEIC.
Therefore, our employees' English proficiency is higher than other Japanese companies.
Other countries, Germany for example, most of their employees can speak English rather than Japanese.
Hence, 730 TOEIC points are common for them.
But an English accent is not associated with TOEIC score.
Even if people have a 900 TOEIC score, their pronunciation is not good.
I found out this fact when I jumped on with this company.
A woman colleague can write English e-mail very well but she speaks with a very strong Japanese accent.
This trend is vice versa.
It's difficult for us to improve the pronunciation by only reading or writing foreign language.
If you want to improve it, you should practice vowel and consonant sounds.
For instance, F sounds is completely different between American and Japanese.
For Americans, Japanese `` Futon `` is a mysterious sound because shape of mouse for `` Fu `` is different between American English and Japanese.
My first diary
now, very late time.....
I'm happy that I know this site.
I'm can't speak english very well, but I really want to be fluent in my English skills.
I want talk about many stories but it's difficult....
please help me:)
my university homework is very hard.
English class is the hardest.
I can't understand my english professsor's lecture....
New York
Help me!
in and at are used even if I show a place and do not understand it how I should have had a good command of it.
I am glad when I get some clear answer.
it was rainy today.
nice to meet you!!
my name is misaki:)
I went to school to take a test today.
it was very difficult!!!!
It was to test whether we could write characters beautifully.
The end of the rainy season
It is very bright, sunny and dizzily hot today.
Please take care not to get dehydrated or suffer from heat stroke.
It's probably better not to be exposed to the sun and heat for a very long time.
Enough water and electrolytes will help prevent suffering from the heat.
Salt will help you, too.
Cool your body and head and hydrate well, or you may suffer heat stroke.
Take care and enjoy summer as much as possible.
Enough to turn off even a love that lasted a 100 years?
They are quite comfortable because my feet don't get sweaty.
When my mom was wearing five-toed socks, dad said that it was enough to turn off even a love that lasted a 100 years (a Japanese proverb).
In addition, my husband agreed with him! ``.
Enough to turn off the love?
You will like it!
Something Funny!
My friend Philipp and I went to the office this morning by bus.
He had to call the guy who would hand the key over to him.
The key was entrusted to him by Philipp's German friend.
Philipp's English is not as good as his German.
After two or three sentences, he asked,' Do you speak Chinese?
' he asked.
Home Town
I'm going to visit my parents next month.
5 / 8 is Mother's day.
What should I give my mother for Mother's day?
I have started an English tweet.
I signed up new twitter account for learning English yesterday.
I'm going to tweet about daily life, family, sports, my job and more in English.
I'd like to communicate with foreign people.
My twitter account: Takessy _ en (URL
( I put the picture in my profile.
It was effected by `` befunky [ URL ].
Is it funny?)
Steven Jobs
No one person has received more praise and abuse than Steven Jobs, who is the CEO of APPLE & amp ; PIXAR corporation, as well as being cover person for over 200 famous magazines.
I was astonished by Jobs' lecture spoken at Stanford University in 2005, which included three stories, and tell us to follow our heart, to find our goals.
The first story is connecting dots.
Although his parents eagerly wanted him to enter a University, but when he really became a freshman, Jobs lost himself.
He didn't know what the meaning of continuing his study in a college where fees are so expensive that it cost most of his parents' money.
So he decided to drop out.
Instead of this, Jobs started to drop in the calligraphy class in his college, which supplied the one of best calligraphy training in the whole country.
Until he created the first APPLE computer, all the effects what he had done before came back.
Once you trust something and follow your heart as well as work hard, one day when you looking back, you can clearly know the secrets of these dots you have done.
The second story is about love and loss.
He was expelled on the grant scale from APPLE, which he created.
Nevertheless, he said that he has been rejected, but he will still love.
Dramatically, these striking things let him found his dreamboat, he established a new company ; NEXT, purchased PLXAR and became the CEO of APPLE again.
According this story, I was inspired by his courage to start over.
So don't (settle / settle down), keep looking your love.
The third story is about death.
He has been diagnosed with cancer.
Jobs described the situation of the examination.
He survived luckily.
And then he learnt stay hungry, stay foolish and facing everyday with an utter innocence.
I've got to keep up with the time.
Well...
I'm finally writing my journal....!
But it is a fact that I hadn't been writing journal entries.
To be honest, there are two reasons...
First, when I wanted to write, there was something was wrong with my PC!
So, I couldn't do it.
To make matters worse, I had no time left
Second, I was too exhausted to do it.
Thanks to the job, I already earned around $ 240 for 4 days.
In fact, I worked today too.
Anyway, I'll write about it in detail sometime.
I said that I will earn enough money on my own to study abroad in Australia, but this job is a little hard.
That's because it is boring.
I'm already tired of giving out leaflets.
LOL In addition, when I do it, people avoid me most of the time...
: (
Thanks for reading!
If you have time, please correct my poor sentences! ;)
I'm home!
I came back home from the USA yesterday.
I realized many differences between Japan the US during my 3-week stay on the East Coast.
Firstly, there are few convenience stores in the US.
In Japan, I can find convenience stores when I get hungry, but I couldn't in the US.
Secondly, streets in the US are designed in grid style, and each street has its own name.
For instance, the names of the streets are numbers (like `` E 32 Street ``, `` 5th Avenue ``) in New York.
It is easy to read maps.
In Japan, I often lose my way because the streets are very complex and narrow and there are a lot of streets which have no name.
Visiting foreign countries enables us to see our countries from other viewpoints.
First!!!