MORE THAN KIP FIT!

Do you know mountain biking? Perhaps you think it¡äs only a sport. You¡äre wrong. Follow reading to know why!.

I¡äm keen on mountain biking since three years ago. Firstly, I tried with a rental bike in the area of Alc¨¢zar. The main reason why I wanted to prove was to lose weight (I was a bit overweight). However, it was wonderful how I could admire the landscape while I was doing sport.  Consequently, I realized that although cycling outside helped me to improve my fitness, really I enjoyed the best breathing pure air and taking pleasure in the countryside.

If someone wants to take up this sport, first, I would recommend him or her to pursue a good mountain bike. It¡äs important to avoid accidents, become comfortable and have a good journey. Secondly, he or she would buy a good helmet and, of course, appropriate clothing. 

I love this sport. I look forward to the weakened, to go out with my bike and my group of friends. All of us spend a good time. And I would like to encourage everybody to prove. Nobody won¡ät regret it.
Lucy Eyes

Lucy Eyes was the last thriller I¡äve seen. 
I don¡ät recommend it to children lower than thirteen years old, 
because it¡äs difficult to understand; for example, the characters are,
Lucy, Molly, and their parents, a cowboy, and a teacher.
The movie is about Lucy¡äs family that moves into a farmhouse, mysterious and
scary.
Also reflects a comparison of Lucy¡äs family, and characters 
from a story their mom read often.
The story actually takes place in a camp, and farmhouse, mysteriously
used in other times.
It¡äs interesting because Lucy¡äs mom discovered a wall in their farm, that
had a weird painting of two sisters just like her¡¯s, the same ones also of the
story she read.
I recommend this movie only to teenagers older than thirteen years old.
The best place for young people in our are is without doubt the lake.
Here they can do many kinds of sport: swimming, sailing, surfing, kiting, rowing and many others. 
At least they can meet other folks and relax, have a sunbathed and listen to the music.
In the summer around the lake are so many concerts, so you have the difficulty finding the right one.
Luckily the souls are closed per ten weeks so the young girls and boys have much time to spend the
leisure time together.  
Dear husband,
I hope you're fine. I remember all of you and miss my family.
Leaving my country, Somalia, was very hard for me.
I miss my big house,, but I don't miss the guns.
I hope to return to my country and see you again.

In the following decades, revolution and civil smote many of the Powers of Europe, and new nations were born. Britain alone escaped almost unscathed from these years of unrest. There was an unparalleled expansion of the English-Speaking Peoples, both by birth and emigration.
I like biathlon. Really, I think it's a very beautiful, interesting and breathtaking kind of sport. In biathlon sportsmen need to run some races, which a very different, some of that are long, some are short. But, short distance doesn't mean it's will be easy or something like that. Sometimes weather conditions are not comfortable for guys, for example: wind, light frog or freeze, all of that are very difficult conditions. So, it's not so easy like it seems. That's why I like it. This sport are for real men. And also most of them are very attractive, big advantage for girls, whose like nice pictures.
There is no future for public transport, because travelling by car is so much more convenient. That is what everyone says when we ask if they prefer public transport or car. 
Using public transport can be not easy, because we have a strict time, and normally we do not have a place to sit and that can be extremely desconfortable.
Sometimes the employers do strike and we clients do not know in time as a result we can not get on time to work, that is one of the disadvantages of using public transport.
One argument for not using the car is that the petrol price is very expensive, but the public transport tickets are also increasing, so that advantage are not so good, actually.
For me car is the best and you? Well, however your choice is, it is necessary to be perfect for your daily life! 
However you use have a nice trip!
 In my opinion, public transport in my country will never improve because my country is so poor and beside it is considered one of Third World countries and another thing must be taken into consideration is they the politicians are horrible they have destroyed my country
When we ask ourselves, how can we take care of the environment? The first thing that we think is the pollution, the car smoke, factory smoke, etc... but, have we thought in the food or clothes? Perhaps when we are buying in the supermarket or other shops we are doing something bad, because we ask assistant a bag o similar to carry at home this food or other things. We can take a bag from our house, because if we do this every time that we are going to buy in each shop, we don't spend more piece of plastic or paper.

But we don't have forgotten the contamination by cars, We can use more the bicycle or public transportation.
Also in the sort way, we should go walking to the destination.ice
If we are working with someone in the same jobs, and who lives near, or he is our neighbor, we can go to the work in the same car, this way we use less oil.
The governments are also important for taking care of the environment. They should have healthy habits and with their examples they can improve the habits of the population.

I love sports,, but I did not get many opportunities to play a sport. I was born in a village in India, my parents are farmers like most of other villagers. The only playground in our village was the school ground which was full of small rock and not good to play any sports. 
When I was a child I help my father on his jobs after my school. We bought television in 1888, after that I became a fan of cricket. I was watching most of the matches. ?ahin and Gangly was my favorite cricketers, I love their batting.


One of the best restaurants I've ever been to is Spizharka. It is situated in the very center of our city and offers a wide variety of dishes and drinks.
The service is really great. The waitresses are helpful and smiling. 
You feel like you are at home! Warm candlelight and small tables with patterned table clothes create a friendly atmosphere.
The dishes aren't very expensive. 
I believe it is suitable for our class
So, my favorite sport in the present time it is a street workout. I have been exercising this sport already long time. I like to exercise on the street, even in the season when the temperature outside below zero. Of course, in summer I like to exercise more than in winter,, but this doesn't stop me. I don't know myself why, but I almost every day go on the street in order to exercise. If It is very coldly and windily outside, I don't worry about it, and I'm exercising at home. For those people, who want to start to exercise the street workout I'm advising to start with basic exercises such as pull-ups,push-ups, dips and squats. That everything basic exercises and they will help you will do a good start up. After some time, when you will be feeling that you are ready for more, you can start to study more difficult exercises.
So, it's my first attempt to create English text!
I dare say what I was quite self-confident a few months ago. But now not.
What's the reason? Because of mind. 
I wasn't satisfied with your behavior.
Sometimes, a lot of phrases and sentences runs in my head, but how to write it down correctly? How can I use to use it?
How can I force my kids to do his homework? How can I explain them? 
The light bulb.
The light bulb was created in 1879 by Thomas Alva Edison. This was one of the everyday inventions that affects our lives. Edison said to create the first commercially practical incandescent light. He was neither the first nor the only person trying to invent an incandescent light bulb. Some historians claim there were 20 over inventors of incandescent lamps prior to Edison¡¯s version, but Edison is often credited with the invention because his version was able to outstrip the earlier versions because of a combination of three factors: "an effective incandescent material, a higher vacuum than others were able to achieve and a high resistance that made power distribution from a centralized source economically viable." (taken from www.bulbs.com)
Edison began a serious research about the incandescent light bulb in October 1878, and his original design were in 1879. Edison and his research team did his discovery commercial and create a company called "Edison Electric Light Company".
I think what this is the most useful invention because without this we can't live like we live, actually.  




Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately. Tom friend of Peter suddenly fainted fell down in the classroom I don't know what to do immediately, first calm down yourself and I checked his pulse beat it is okay, then I knew that he is out of danger, so I called my classmates everyone rushes to the spot but still he is not moving, so we decide to take him into the hospital or call the ambulance, finally we call the ambulance without ant delay. Everyone eagerly waiting for the ambulance arrival but still not yet reached, the reason is our college location is little far from the city that's why it is getting late. We were waiting patiently, finally the ambulance arrived and take him into the hospital immediately. 
Lately I have seen a very interesting announcement in International Sports Monthly magazine.
I was interested if I could write such an article and win a prize. And I decided to try.
Nowadays, healthy way of life is very popular with most people all over the world.
And as for me, I've been going in for sport for several years. What is my favorite kind of sport?
It's ordinary bodybuilding. Why did I choose it? I want to be fit and have a good health. I lost several kilos and could wear my favorite clothes. It became possible for me to run easily. I'd like to give advice to everybody not to sit at home and watch TV. Go to sports gyms, be active, and you will feel in another way. You will forget about doctors and expensive medicine. Sport is like drugs. If you don't have training for a long time, your body will feel something unusual. Your muscles will be strong, and you'll be able to fulfil any difficult job. People will look at your figure enviously.
Describe your bedroom.

My bedroom is quite big. The wall of my bedroom are white and the floor is dark gray. In my bedroom there is a brown bed, a yellow growers, a little light brown bedside table and a big brown wardrobe. On the wall there are some pictures of my family, but I don¡¯t nave any posters.

I am living at S?o Carlos, in the countryside of S?o Paulo, from Brazil. In my city, the environment's protection is so difficult. First, we have an extinction area of Gerardo closer to Federal University of S?o Carlos, but sometimes, the area will be used to construct a new building of University. We have done several movements, but sometimes is not worked. Secondly, the Hall doesn't matter with the environment; for example, the Hall stopped with garbage's selection collection when the new major assumeded the hall. It demonstrates the effort was done in the last 10 years, it was over because of the new political position of the major. It is so stupid because the environment need to be over then political position. Third, we have not founded a green political to eliminate rubbish. Instead, to use a selective collection of garbage, or recycling of materials, or the sanitary landfill; we have used the dump fill that is prejudice the soil. At last, the population, in the majority of the times, doesn't matter to throw away the garbage on the street or in a prohibited area. In conclusion, in my city, the concern of the environment's protection do not work how it is necessary to protection of soil, environment and healthy. 
Environment is the surrounding. There is no alertness in our locality. They were busy in their own work. Everyone were not focus or see what happening in our place. They used to speak about how hot today is?but they don't know what makes this much hot.I am interest in planting tree and makes surrounding clean. Some people used to burn forest as if those forest is useless. Man are greedy because of all the thing getting from the forest are free. They daycare about environment because that doesn't give anything to them.  
Management accountant practice is very important for organization to making decision about human resources, sales, marketing and potential customers. Most of the organizations known how is affect management accountant practice on them work, therefore they are crossing good program and employee.
I have been in the USA last year, first in order to look for a job as a pharmacist but also, having a lot of time to explore a new world. I spent about two years there, but I wanted to come back to Italy because I missed my home. At first, I had called a travel agent, but he said he couldn¡¯t be able to book me a flight before two months, so I called my brother who heavily regret me for not having told him about the trip, and he promised me he would have booked a flight sooner than that good for nothing agent. I believed in him, but I didn¡¯t know how I was wrong. He had booked me the flight,, but he didn't pay for it, because At that moment he hadn¡¯t got cash enough on him. The worst thing was to find it out at the airport. I had never felt so nervous!

Environment is always a hurting problem in the world. There are companies so much, they make our life polluted. To take care of the environment, each of us has to do anything such as propaganda to the people in the country, ...about my village, we use banana leaf stead of Nixon, garbage disposal sensibly...and so on. We should clean our area to attract visitor and introduce to many other countries in the world. Let protect our lung
Hi, today I'm gonna talk about myself. My name is Abram speed Mubarak. I'm 13 years old. I live in Saudi Arabia(Riyadh) . And I'm in grade nine. I have 9 sisters with me, we 10. And 9 brothers. I really love to learn English lounge & French lounge, spinach lounge . And I speak Arabic.  
My dear Daniel.
Are you studying mathematics for your exam? I hope you pass it with a good grade!

I just finish my lunchtime, and before prepare everything to go to work I was thinking of you and I wanted to give you a small surprise with this fantastic photos, I hope you like it.

With all my love

Victoria.
Dear Sir or Madam

I would like to apply for the job that you have advertised. 

I'm a happy, energetic person who likes to work with children. Furthermore, I love young children. 

Furthermore, I have worked in many kitchens before, and I have gained a lot of experience there.

Bye
Marisa
I usually wake up at six o'clock in the morning, then I'll take a quick shower. After school, I'd like to eat fresh fruit. I am keen to run during the nighttime.
IN my country people do a lot of mistake and have a lot of bad habits concerning their attitude towards the rubbish, they are always throwing their old things and rubbish in public place, the government also cannot do their role towards their people and their bad behavior 
I like to workout on push up bars. It is impossible not to love doing sports activity on the fresh air.
If you want to start working out, you should be ready for a big load on your muscles 
On Thursday, September 11, the term exams finished and our week of vacation started. In the afternoon I went to my dance classes. It was fun because we learn a new hip hop dance, and we finished our tap dance.

On Friday, I went to the mall with my family. I bought one sweater and two jeans. Later I went to the book store and bought three books; ¡°legend¡±, ¡°wonder¡±, and ¡°Eleanor & Park¡±.

On the weekend, I stay at home. I start reading ¡°Eleanor & Park¡±; it was amazing, I was laughing a lot because of the things that the characters said. The other things I do were sleeping, ate, and watch TV. 

The next day I went with my friends to see a movie. We saw ¡°if I stay¡± and I loved it. The movie is about a teenager named Mia that had a car accident with her family. Her father and her mother died before they arrive to the hospital. Mia survive,, but she is in a coma, and she has to decide if she wants to live without her mother and father or if she wants to die.

Later in the week I pass the day drawing. I draw a meadow, a little girl, and a butterfly. The next days I didn¡¯t do much. I just sleep and watch movies at home. The day before I start school, I do an investigation for literature class.

This was what I did in my vacations, I didn¡¯t do a lot,, but I loved my vacations. 

Hello Jo, my name is Miro. I'm from Amtrak. Serbia is my country where I live for 24 years. If you like and wish to come here, my best advice is to stay at home. Maybe you can bring some money and spend it on something fun. Best wishes. Miro. 
As per the today topic "No Future for public transport", I would like to add comments on that please be patient my English is not too good as your readers think. So, lets start,

Most of the Metro cities are now days attract people of city towards Metro only not just because of the fare but because of the time that it saves. Now these days, public would not like to travel in the public Transport to save their time as well as money. Metro is good for even health of the people as no pollution and all because it runs on electricity, and also it connects most of the city as Delhi has a wide area span of Metro that is really awesome.
Other than that, public transport is also not good for Natural resources which is not good for the future of the country. 
If you visit Taiwan, you will never miss the temples here. There are so many temples here. So, now there is a chance for you to pretend the god. Julian Folk Arts Group is a group of people who are good at our traditional performance, which is "imitate the faces and pose of gods". In here, they will teach you how to draw the face of god, dance like god, and beat the drum. Curious? Just come and give it a try!
I think pay expensive tax on personal car can reduce the use of cars or other vehicles in order to solve the traffic problems.
Because all people like money, for example, many people don¡¯t buy car with expensive tax, so people must use the public transportation, such as bus, subway. The public transportation will reach, so they can build more station for suburban and more public car to carry this. Therefore, traffic will be batter.


Dear sir/madam

I am applying for the position in the USA Summer Camps to work this year.
I am 29 years old, originally from Brazil.
Furthermore, I am an English student where I have been studying for five years, and recently, I passed on the FCE which is a well recognized certificate.
In 2010, I graduated in electronics engineering.
From June to September of the 2013 I worked for a tourism company, my position had involved take after of groups of people going to England, this previous experience makes me suitable for this job announced.
In addition to this, personally I am really helpful, exciting, cheerful and engaged.
I do practice sports such as football, basketball and chess, with these skills I could help children have fun while teaching them the all goods benefits in practicing sports.
By applying for the job offered I am willing to work in all different sorts of job, I do not matter which, as long as I have the opportunity of being in the USA, as English is my passion.

To sum up, I feel rather confident to assume this position, and thank you for considering my application.

My faithfully
Alessandro Costa. 
I think public transport is very important. There is no way to travel from Egypt to the USA using a car. A plane may take about 16 hours. A car may take days or months for the same distance. 

I really overwhelm to be third member of my small family-Peter, Maria, both of which are my parents in 45 years of the same age and my little brother, Patrick-14 year old in a mischievous manner. Their gentle norm with lovely and adorable mind takes a reference to their hobbies-reading.
Nowadays, a person's worth seems to be judged according to the social status and material possessions, that is mostly to happen in high class families, as they are focus on achievements as power, political influences etc. on the other hand for a middle class family the old-fashioned values are still important as it is the inheritance from our ancestors in terms of values as honesty, kindness, loyalty, etc.

Metro is the most comfortable way of transportation in Moscow. Metro is the only one that I use in the city. Using a ground transportation is not comfortable because of traffic. Just a few years ago, we started to use a special road line. But the problem is Russian drivers are not getting used to keep this line free. Moscow traffic is awful. Everyone is in a hurry. There is no difference if you use car or bus. For example, American public transport has a special line and a schedule, and it works like a train, I mean come in exact time like a train. 
That¡¯s my dream"when I joined the faculty of languages and translation I was very happy because I achieved my dream. In this faculty I faced some problems with my English, I began to ask "How can I improve my English?" all the answer was "you have to listen and read, so you can write and speak well" I said okay I have to depend on myself, I began to join groups on Facebook where I found some people shared their knowledge with others, I followed them immediately.
I am in my way to improve my English, I ask Allah to guide me to the right way.
My dream is that I want to open a Center for Language Learning,
to teach children and adults in my country good English and I will avoid traditional education.
The best thing that can encourage me to open this center that I have in my country 5 friends who study in the faculty of languages and translation and I think that they will be very happy for joining me in my center.
I know that is a very amazing dream,, but I pray Allah to give me all means to achieve my future dream.
Alex, my friends and I will go to the cinema at the weekend. 
Would do you please join us?
We will see an action movie.
If you join, we can meet in Ambassador mall in the city at 7 p.m. 


 
The public transport have no future, the crisis in 2008 ; has been down the oil prices. The oil is cheap now and new cars are more efficient and the government give stimulus for consumers.
One day in October, Michael a boy was studying architecture discovered a box with a message, while he is opening a box, he heard a door. At this moment a big man went into the bedroom. This man was his father, who had dead. Michael was very nervous and confused because he didn't understand anything.
He spoke with his father and he asked him because he was there,, and his father responded that he had the biggest secret about his family.
" In the past Matilda your mother killed your brother, although she had a reason, he was a monster because he killed a lot of people in our city, so we went to another city."
But Michael did not believe this story,, and he thought that he was crazy. This situation was impossible because his father had dead and At this moment he ran, and he opened the door and his father said you must be here because I must speak with you more time and explain because I can speak with you,, but Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
Dear Mrs Kate,

I want working in our caf¨¦.  I like a much food and drink. Furthermore, I work in a coffee last year in my country. Furthermore, I can work long time.

Sincerely,

 Tracy
How are you?

Today we received a shipment from Visual service center under our old account number, it could be a mistake by service center as a notice regarding major organizational restructure already sent to service centers. In issued notice it clearly states that all defect parts should be sent to Slovakia with effect from 01/06/2015.

If any more shipments are returned using our old TNT account number, there is no option other than invoicing service center for not following instructions.

So please advise all service centers to return defect parts to Slovakia instead of England.
Nowadays, sport is very important part of our life. Many doctors recommended the practice of sport, because it is very healthy for our body and for mind. Every day, there are many articles and news information that talking about the benefits that you get if you practice sport.

My favorite sport is swimming because as soon as start this sport you feel better. In spite of you don't lost weight, you can win endurance and flexibility. 
When I stay in water I feel free and very hastily. Not only is sport when you feel sweaty, but also you do a lot of exercise. However, you don't have the feeling that you are very tired, is different, at the same time is fantastic!

On the one hand, my advice that I would give to someone starting my favorite sport, swimming, is that you need a little will power because sometimes, for example in winter, you will not want to go to the gym, let alone you get in a pool! 

On the other hand, my other advice is that I am very sure that you will feel wonderful and happy! May be not at first time, but sure later. I promise you that it will be this way.

In conclusion, sport is very necessary and useful for you can improve your life. You start, and then you explain to me how are you?
Hi, my name is Elliot and I like TV games and Lego. I also like to speak English,, but I can`t speak it at home because my little brother just says ¡°stop talk English¡± when I talk English. I know that I have not wraithen it,, but I have a brother. He is 9 years old, and he is perfect at saying what he wants all the time. I mean, when he wants something he just said give me that. I have two parents, like the most people.  My sums name is Jenny and my dads name is Richard and they are the best parents I know. I don't know so many parents but whatever.  I like books too, but I can't read so good, so I am not reading so hard books with hundreds of pages. Furthermore, I read books like DIARY of a Wimpy kid or like Percy Jackson. Furthermore, I like to talk English at school too,, but my friends don't like when I talk it in school, so I talk Swedish the. My merit lech on is the Swedish elections because that I like to write histories. My bests friend name is Viktor, and he is really fun and like him. My family live in a 

Hi Daniel,

How are you? I am going to describe me, so you will be able to recognize me when we meet at the train station. I am tall, around 2 meters, black hair and blue eyes. Furthermore, I will be wearing a white T-shirt and a yellow short. Furthermore, I will be at the train station at 7 o'clock and I will be waiting for you at the gate number seven. 

Kind Regards,

Rafael
I would like to describe my brother Rishabh Banal in this letter. He is 24 years old, and he looks very similar to me. He likes to play guitar in free time and likes to go out with friends.
How can I help the environment ?
 
  
 How can a group of friends helps the environment ? This year, me and my friends are going to help Marque Cargo from the recent forest fire. We are worried that if the trees don't get planed soon, they will never grow up again. That is the reason why we are going to plant there 1000 trees. 
Egypt have more historical places such as pyramids is the one of empirical in the world and more people from around the wold come to see this pyramids the wold think how Egyptian people make this building from may be a thousand year and still stand without change and more tourist come to take photo in the pyramids and study the stone and how the old Egyptian make this one without modern tools such as cranes and other modern machine more scientific teams come from all the world to study this building and make Egyptian science in more universities around the world to study how the air going inside this building and how it keeps the food inside it and how this big stone takes out from far places and come for this place and how this building keep the body of the people after died and how this people live inside the building and why this building like this and what the benefit of this building and how to make kike this building 
        
Public transport have improved the regional development since the past decade, it's convenient and necessary for a city life. But when it comes to travel, it'll be more convenient if you have a car, because you will not like to go where everybody goes. If you have a car, you can go anywhere you want and stop by any beautiful spot you like. It's more flexible for your travel plan. And, it's really enough development in our planet, it would be better if we can leave some place blanked, we don't need so much convenient transportation, and we can still live well. Save some nature to the earth, and leave clear air for our kids. Build public transport in a city, not in a country.
My favorite sport game is Cricket. It is very important and very enjoyable game. Today, cricket is a very famous game in the world. Among them, cricket is very famous in Sri Lanka. We could go to in the world from cricket.  It is very great. Today we have clever cricketers and famous amperes than other countries. It is very valuable. Australia, England, South Africa and New Zealand are very famous country for cricket game. But those countries are very developed, and they have any facilities. But Sri Lanka is a developing country yet. They have no facilities than other countries. But Sri Lanka cricket team could win the World cup 2014. It is very important opportunities in our countries. So as I think I can enjoy in cricket than other games. 
You can start the cricket game. And you can earn more money, and you can go to other countries. Today we have lots of sports games.  Volley ball, net ball, Elle, Table tennis, Karate, etc. But it is not famous, and we couldn¡¯t go to in the world. But cricket is very famous, and we know any cricketers. We can be a famous and earn more money. Cricket is good for our health than other games. In my opinion, cricket is best for you. You can be a good cricketer.


You do not what to do? Are you a tourist?  Are you lost in the city without knowing what to do?  If I am right, continue reading this. We have a lot of shopping facilities, it is the good thing about living in a big city like Madrid, because we have a lot of different shops since clothes shops, pets shops, food shops, shoes shops, accessories shops, toys shops, presents shops and much more types of shops that know I can not remember, but you can find almost all you want, or you need it is not incredible? But for some of them you have to search very well because some shops are unique, and some others are very good hidden, but for that you have specialized transports that will take you to wherever you want, or you need to go
Hi,
You won't believe what I did last month!  I worked at the backstage of rock concert! It was such a great experience for me.  I applied in one music club in our city, and I was really excited when they replied and asked me to help because I enjoy going to rock concerts, and I was truly curious about how the backstage is working. What was any job? Mostly I helped others a carried the stuff. I enjoyed working with a sound master so far. It was quite stressful, but at the end of the concert the atmosphere was amazing. People were singing and shouting - they all seem to be really happy. I hope I will do that again once.
See you Arron
Steve
Hi Jo,
It's really nice that you are asking me about it. Poland is really beautiful and you choose it wisely. I suggest that you can start your trip from Warsaw. It's heart of Poland and you will learn everything about work, education and people from here. Every big city in Poland is very similar to each other. If you want to relax, you can also go to mountains or sea. Even there, you can meet really nice people and talk with them. But let's talk about work there.
We appreciate kind and hardworking people. But you can't expect that they are going to pay you a lot of money. Rate is pretty low. But there is a chance that you can meet generous people.

Take care
Ola
Hi Party.
I`m going to tell you about me.
My name is Agustina L¨®pez, I was born in 1999 on 12th April.
I`m fifteen years old.
Last year I celebrated my fifteen party and I loved it very much, (I want to celebrate it again) 
This year is my sixteenth birthday and I`m going to celebrate in my home, with my family and some friends.

I love to do many things like sleeping, going dancing with my friends, going to the beach, cinema, shopping center, running, and I love the fashion very much like the shoes, make up, bags and clothes.

This summer was the best I went to Churchill Alta with my best friends their name are: Emilia, Agustina, Micaela and Luc¨ªa.
I have a great time with them. I also went to Persepolis with my family and all the days.
Furthermore, I went to the beach, we loved. 

Furthermore, I like English because it is very important to know other language to communicate with other people and IR I go to another country it is very important to know English.

Furthermore, I think that it is very interesting, and I like it
Dear pen-friend,

Hello, how are you? I hope you are fine when you read this letter. I am very well and everything is all right. Well, I write to tell about my last summer.

I had a really nice experience working in a cinema. I wouldn't have done it unless my friend Lucy who encouraged me. The staff is fascinating and helped me all the time and the customers were gentle all the time. I learned lots of things such as dealing with money and tickets and watch movies freely.

We got to work at four in the afternoon, and it is very relaxing. I had a day off that I spent time at home or going to the gym, where I met handsome guys. This summer was really great. I recommend you to try this kind of job in case you want to earn extra money and also meet new people.

Lots of kisses and hugs, please write soon

Love

Giselle
 
The problem is that if everyone thinks that traveling by car is convenient, absolutely everyone will go everywhere by car, and the roads will become chockablock.

You see man, I don't like crowded roads, a ND prefer to travel by tram. It is cheap and eloquence.
I play basketball on weekends since I am little.
I also like to play baseball, too.
Furthermore, I can play basketball and baseball like no tomorrow.
Furthermore, I usually play baseball with a group of my friends.
Furthermore, I play with them on the playground.
Furthermore, I can't image the life without sports.
In the today society. The most people are travelling by their car, because the public transport was not convenient for people to use. Maybe, in fact, the lands are bigger, so that the transport had not published to anywhere.  The general transport constructions can divide to three levels. On the lands, the railroad and highway is the go through the most city roads. In the sea, include the route and port construction. In the sky, include airplane flights and airport construction. The transport construction and economic development has a close relationship, and utilized of land are more important. The development of the railroad and highway are easy to published, but construct of seaport and airport must with congenital condition. When integrate of the economy and land planning are accomplished, the public transport constructions are convenient for people to use.
I am going to write about how life is going to change in the next 50 years. Although we don¡ät realized we have to be conscious 
that every day is a different day if we compare with the one has passed. 

Some years ago we didn¡ät use the technology to get in touch with friends and family, but nowadays, it¡äs the most important thing for
some people who they can¡ät live without it. I am speaking about the mobile, how it changed our life.It¡äs normal 
that in the next 50 years it is going to change. It will be more advantages in general, and it will give us a lot of good things but maybe some bad things too.

To sum up, although we don¡ät want that our life changed, it is normal that it will have different changes. It is necessary for our lives to have or to feel that we are getting better.


 My favorite sport is chess because it is the only game for our mind. It also helps us in studies. I agree that it's not physical exercise but a mental one. There are many physical exercises like swimming but name any game except chess that makes our mind sharp. I like many other games,, but the best one is this. I am not saying that we should always play chess, as physical activities are also important. The reason why I would advise someone this sport is that the children who are not interested in their studies or would not be able to study. In that case, chess would help him. It would make child mind sharp, and he would not get distract by the surroundings.
Local transportation is one of the most problem in our area. The local transportation become difficult and expensive. So the government must take an action to make it easy. Public media also must educate people of the importance of Local translation and how they preserve it. The Government must save the gasoline and jazz to resolve the problem. They must find a solution to this difficult problem. They must maintain roads. People also have an important role to solve this problem. They should reserve the energy by using bus instead of using their own cars. They also can walk or ride a cycle. Government must maintain the public transportation and make it safe. We can solve this problem if we want that.
I have thought that writing an article on my favorite sport would be interesting for the readers, above all, and making no differences on the sport you have chosen, it is paramount practicing some sport, whatever you choose, such as spinning, that is my favorite sport.
My piece of advice to take up a hobby, in this case a physical hobby, which is interesting for your health.
I rather enjoy spinning, feeling the rhythm of the music lower and lower, this gives me high energy each time I went spinning.
If you want to start practicing some sport, first think about how much time you are willing to spend on it, then try once and if you are having a good time go ahead and do the most of your time enjoying sport, nevertheless, be careful and go slowly because you might be injured.
The more sport you practice the better you feel, indeed, your mood would not be blue anymore, and your body will be thin and gorgeous.
First, my opinion is that there is a future for the public transport systems. If we take a look at the Swiss public transport system, in the bigger cities almost all people go to work by public transport. The advantage they get is the following: They don't have to look for parking possibilities, they can leave the bus or the train and a few minutes after they can begin to work. These people also help to protect the environment by saving our natural resources like petrol.  To conclude, in bigger cities like Bern or Zurich there are no doubts that the public transport system would be less convenient than travelling by car.
 The process how to make the notes for the bank can be outlined in six consecutive steps.
 First, the banknotes should be considerate how to design included background color, artwork and security issues.
 Then, they are supposed to prepare a sailed machinists.
Subsequently, the sheets of banknotes are printed on the metal plates. The notes have a special link with color on both sides, which raised images slightly.
 The most important step is to inspect the notes which are good quality sheets and which are bad sheets. If the sheets are good, those sheets are then cut into separately and packed into cars in order to dispatch all over the city. If the sheets are bad, those sheets are then destroyed through burning.
 Sport is a very important part of a healthy lifestyle. It keeps our body strong. Today we have a lot of different sports, so we can choose something that really fits ourselves.
 I enjoy running. It is a kind of thing that everybody can do,, and it affects all parts of my body. I literally feel myself stronger after every time I run. 
There is no doubt that traffic adds to pollution. The public transport offers a possible solution for the problem, because much people can transport in one vehicle. The government has a responsibility to encourage the public to use buses and the underground more. However, there are a number of changes that need to be considered.

Firstly, public transport should be made free. The government should raise taxes to pay for the service. Cars are generally more expensive.
First, I think the public transport is more expensive. And if we compare the money you spend with the car and the amount that you spend with the public transport, it is less.
Secondly, if you use the car, you haven't wait much time to catch the bus or the train, and maybe you can arrive later at your job, for this situation.
I believe that use your car has a lot of advantages or benefits, it is more comfortable and less expensive.
 Last summer I worked at cinema.I think it is a very good job because you can see any films you like for free. The minus of this work is very big salary and I think that I will work at this cinema on the next summer.

My favorite sport is doing yoga.
I do yoga to aid relaxation.
Yoga calms UND vitalizes body and mind.
I do yoga at least one hour every day.
From Monday to Friday I do it at home, at weekends I attend yoga classes.
Yoga is a very convenient sport.
We can do it at any time as we like.
But if you are a beginner, it's better for you to attend regular yoga classes.
You can learn correct postures in classes.
After doing, it skillfully, you can do it at home or any place.
People's lives will change dramatically in the next 50 years, Equipment and tools have evolved since the beginning of human history. In recent decades, however, developments have been particularly groundbreaking, Man has been able to invent machines, which they have been put to work automation is a great help to mankind, because it significantly increases the standard of living and frees people from hard work. The result is much less work and a better life. The disadvantage, however, is that because of the machines many people have lost their jobs 




Dear Jo

I read your letter, I would like to know some details about what places do you want to visit. I advise you to visit Quer¨¦taro it has had an excellent service with foreign people since five years ago.

Talking about your new job, I was searching some vacancies however it required a job for full-time, so I am going to continue searching some jobs of part-time.

See you when you arrive at Mexico City

Sincerely 
Uriel 
Nowadays, people get around constantly. It's better to use public transport or private transport? Well, ecologists say that get around using transport public is more beneficial for the environment than using the car or motorbike. In recent years, the numbers of people who use public transport has increased a lot, in comparison with ten years ago. But actually does it have a future?
It's more comfortable, faster and preferable than have to run to take the bus, wait the train, etc. This is a fact which indicates the public transport there is no future in our society. Other signals are, for example, if you travel by car, you can park the car in front of the place where you want to go. But if you take the bus, you have to take down in a bus stop, maybe a bit far from where you want to go. Also, it has to say that maybe in the future, technology will create a car that doesn¡¯t pollute the air, and then, use public transport won't be necessary.
yeah, I think it's statement is quite right because every person have car nowadays. Transport are important, but car is more reliable for families they went together without waiting for transport.
More flexible with a lot of fun with family. 
Alison read the note, smiled, and immediately put on her coat. She looked like happy, and she was looking forward to finishing the class to tell her friend what had happened.
After the class, Alison joined her friends. She was very enthusiastic and telling them that Juan, the boy who she was fallen in love, had written a letter for her.
Then the friends could not leave to pay attention in the Alison¡äs words. She transcribed the letter with a lot of passion because it was evident that Juan was interested in Alison too.
While all girls was heading to Alison, Juan appeared as a gosh. Alison was like tomato and all her friends laughed at her. The boy felt very embarrassed, therefore he carried on his ways and he did not say anything to her. 
Alison always through: "If I had not told this story to my friends I had passed all evening with Juan"

I think that for the public transport there is a future, because over time the gasoline prices and the value of the reparations of the vehicles increase. Like in other things the prices increase, from the aliments to clothes and home supplies, gas, water, electricity. Then the people will choose the public transport in the future.
My relaxing activity
Swimming has been always my favorite sport. I used to go to the swimming pool when I was in the school to learn, and it became in my favorite activity when I was exhausted. I was with my sister and my friends and I spent a wonderful moment.
Nowadays, I usually go swimming twice a week and I really enjoy swimming because I can chill out and disconnect my mind. Moreover, it is said to be healthy in order to improve problems in the back, so that going swimming is really beneficial for me.  
In recent days I found out a gadget to listen to music while I am swimming, and it is marvelous because I also love listening to music.
To beginners in this sport, I would recommend that a trainer teaches swimming properly because it is very important to pay attention to the position of the arms. Furthermore, it is necessary to wear glasses.
Swimming is one of the best sport to practice it is due to require all parts of the body. For this reason, it is a perfect activity to do sport and enjoy.
There are lots of problems in our life. For example:Transport. There are lots of kinds of Transportation as Buses, cars,Subways, Trains or ties.Maybe they are comfortable, teribble, essay,dangerous or average. If you are late, you can use subway because it is faster, safer and cheaper. Cars and buses become dangerous and make a Problem in the street.
Alison read the note, smiled, and immediately put on her coat.
She went to the station train and get a ticket to London.
She stayed there and read again the note, the address was near to the Big Ben.
When the train came, she smiled and goes up and sit.
She turned her hied and saw him "he was fowling me" she thought"well, I should ask him what are he doing here"
"What are you doing here" ask Alison he looks her but with a bad smile, and turn his head

Public transport is the backbone of a city. Usually, people use public transport to travel around the city. If in a city people are using more public transport than their own private vehicle then it will help to protect the environment and traffic as well. But nowadays automobile companies are more focused on the improvements of the cars so that they can be more environment friendly and traffic friendly. Future of public transport will be measure on the basis of advancement of the private vehicle. Sometime people get offended because of the crowd and the inconvenience caused by some people while using public transport. But the main concern will be technology. Technology is being more advanced. A car is being made so Eco friendly and user-friendly that it is more 
Many people said that at school all the students have to start a sport and frequent that one regularly.
It is not a good idea because some students have to study all the afternoon for other subjects and the free time is very scant. AA's an example if a student need to recuperate a subject or have to take a good mark, they can't go to do a sport because there is no time. 
In contrast to a sport is very important because we can make new friends, or we can start to take responsibility, but the most important thing is that we are always active e our body can get good results.
To sum up, do sports is very important for teenagers to which the body is going to grow and do it regularly is commitment that we should take. In my opinion, however, do a sport mandatory is not educational because we must do a sport with enthusiasm not bothered or for obligation 
Dear Sir,
I'm writing in regard to the watch Fossil FS4735, similar to FS4812 but with different colors.
I've seen it a couple of days ago, and I was going to buy it, but it has disappeared from your 
products list (I suppose it has been depleted). However, I wonder if you could tell me when it
would be available again.
Thank in advice for your information.
Yours faithfully
In my opinion, they are not my friend. If your parents are your friends, you would live in harmony with them. They will consider you as an independent people. Accordingly, You take responsibility for what you're done.
However, they are not my friends. There are some reasons, they are not, are as follows. First, I make my every effort to do my job better, however, they only consider that I waste my time doing wrong thing. Next, they don't believe my capability is good. I do everything but nothing. Finally, they totally don't listen to what my point is. They always look at me like a kid never grow up. It is ridiculous that my parents don't believe of ability. I am overwhelmed with grief, living with them. I cannot tolerate their pride and prejudice anymore. Furthermore, I prefer staying alone to living with them.
People often discuss if TV viewing is useful for the education. In my opinion, to watch TV is actually helpful for learning new things. There is one argument that shows, that the TV promotes us. The main reason for this is, that the TV is teaching us, because it is an important medium in our lives. A good example of this are the much informative news, which we are allowed to get. This clearly shows that the TV is lecturing. To sum up, TV viewing is not just entertaining at all; It definitely is also educating.
Many people argue about the use of TV. Some of them believe that it can only entertain us, while others do believe that it can also educate. However, I think that TV can do both. I bet if somebody wants to have some fun he or she can just choose the right Chanel or movie such as comedies, video gags or funny TV shows.  Meanwhile, if an individual wants to learn from TV. TV provides lots of cognitive programs like cooking, taking care of pets, how to eat as well. For me, I do prefer reality shows that help people how to deal with problems.
Football is the most favorite sport in the World. It was founded by talented athlete in The UK in early 1900. The Sport was becoming very famous since first World Cup was held in Uruguay until the present. I really enjoy watching and playing football since I was a kid. There are several reasons of why people really enjoyed soccer so mush.


Nothing is permanent in this world, I've known these words from the mouth of my parents and until now it is in my heart that help me to deal with this kind of life. Sometimes you're happy and sometimes you are sad, nor you are success, or you are failed, that is the wheel of the life we are taking. 

Life is changing very fast as the days on the calendar is going, the flow of life continuously revolving with the world every person have. Nobody can tell how, when, where and what will happen in the next 50 years of our life. It depends on how you deal with what you have at the present to be prepared for the forthcoming changes in the future. 

There are a lot of factors that could greatly affect on what you will be in the coming 50 years of your life. But the most vital part for these changes is yourself. Everybody has the right one for a change,, but it should be for the betterment and not for the worse. With the simultaneous growing inventions of technologies, way of living go through with it. A complicated way from before, advance technologies made it easy and simple now, what else more could we expect next.
The digital age has been a big problem for musical industry because the new technologies and internet had helped more the musical piracy. The people already do not buy a CD, simply downloads it

¡°Piracy is destroying the music industry¡± as it is a violation of copyright. It is a shame that a person is working during many moths for after the people want to enjoy his work without having to pay, it is literally to steal. It is like you design a chair and the people to take without paying.

The singers have to adapt and be able to survive piracy, now most their income are the concerts and digital platform like Spotify.

I think that people should be more responsible and respect the work of others so that society evolves in a healthy way and without conflicts.

Today, many people, groups or social movements are disagreed with different and mainly aspects of our dominant culture; for example, the marriage or the age for married, the role of women in the family, the religions, the education and new ways of family and many values. This perspective of life is inspired by contra cultural movements and some people call to these people as ¡°alternative¡±, but it is each day more common, and it let an inclusive and diverse society. The culture is changing in this way, maybe it can be wonderful for the human freedom.  CHANGES IN COLOMBIAN CULTURE 
Eating habit in my country really has changed in the last ten years. It's r isn't clear complete, but I spouse it depends on changing habit of life in developing process of our society.
At first and important change is about eating prepared food that isn't healthy usually, its reason probably woman's life stile that is going to big change in the way that they don't like staying at home and spend their time to making food, now they prefer to buy prepared good.
The other matter is about our habit to eating food together with our family that were a custom in humanity life not just in our culture, but now because of hard and busy life, we had to eat our meal mostly days of a week.  Now, we forget big dinner table that are fulled with family members.
But a good chance of our habit is attention to Valery food and healthy food because to get information on internet and another media that are a accessible way for all people easily these days.
Total l think changing is ignorable, but we can control it to make our life better, specially about food that is the most important aspect of our life, but we don't pay attention to it enough.
I am a programmer who wants to write about programming languages and skills. The truth of the matter is I think I'm full of ideas,, but unfortunately I can't describe my knowledge and experiences in English. However, I can write these ideas in my own native language and that's why I'm thinking that one day I should be able to write those ideas in English as well.
Dear Sophie, I have just come back from a really exciting few days with my cousin. That was the best place I had ever been. We went to New York for four days. 
On Thursday, we arrived at 12.15. While I was in the bathroom, me cousin was smoking. When I went back, a policeman asked him not to smoke, so he was angry during the whole flight. On Friday, we went on an incredible sightseeing,, but the guide told me not to take pictures because I had to buy them. On Saturday night, we went to a formal restaurant to eat pasta. Finally, we departed at 18.45 pm. I think I will go back next year.
Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately, but he forgets what he had to do after thinking he remembered that he had to visit his grandmother as she was ill, and his mother told him that his grandmother wanted to see her doctor and wanted him to take her by his car as doctor's clinic far from her house peter decided to go, and he drove his car to his grandmother's house in the next street after he arrived, he saw his grandmother was waiting for him on the front of the street he apologized to her and asked her to come to the car, "never mind" she told and ride the car beside him. Peter drove his car to the doctor's clinic and after half an hour he arrived and he and his grandmother go above through the stairs to reach the doctor's clinic after they arrived they found that they have to stay period of time to take his turn they waited and then their turn came .they entered the doctor and the doctor was very kind he welcomed them and after check Peter's grandmother. She was very fine 
There is a man who is most important for one's life. I am not different from that. There is a back stairs influence in my life, he is none but my father. I respect him so much and admire also. He is my best friend who never hurts me. He always helps me by giving good advance. He is an ideal farmer who never and even tells a lie. His means of livelihood is the simplest. He always honors the oldest and taught us of avoiding tells a lie. So far as I remember one day he was advising me, suddenly an old man entered the conversation and told a foolish speech. Nevertheless, my father didn't tell him arrogantly, but he made him know the right thing politely. He is a fluent speaker. That's why I admire him.
Everyone makes mistakes, No one say I have not made any mistake in my life.

I have made many mistakes I guess.

But is that big problem in our life or small problem, or it really does not matter?

Or do you really regretted what have you done? 

Travelling by car plays an important role in our life. There are a lot of private transport in the streets. However, travelling by bus or tram never get away from our daily routine. Travelling by bus is not such convenient as getting a car, but you would never know what can happen with your car, where it will stick or some other accident will happen. 
Public transport has a timetable. This fact gives government such opportunity to to manage the traffic on the roads, cities or towns streets. Private transport give us traffic jams, a lot of accidents and stressful situations. We are getting nervous because we are responsible not only for our life but other people, too. 
And also we have to understand that use public transport is cheaper than use a car. 
The other side of the problem is ecology. Why do we think that only convenience can be the main point of using a car? 
What can we say about our ecological consciousness?
Let's take a bicycle travelling to our school or job instead of using any public or private transport.
Transport is more important for our life.
Public transport is becoming no future because of travelling by car is more convenient.
Public transport are not suitable for luggage's.
Travel plan need to depend on public transport time.
It is more fun when we're travelling by car.
We can play music or talk anything while we travel in the car
Public transport is more boring.
If there is no Public transport in some area, then we need to hire taxi.
So If we have our car, it is much easier than using transport.

Dear Jo,

How are you?  Nice to receive your letter and learn that you will be in Hong Kong this summer.

Hong Kong is a wonderful place for shopping, eating and sightseeing country.  You can taste sea-food in SAI King and Aberdeen.  Visiting Big Buddha in Gamma Island, watch the beautiful night view in the Peak.  Besides, Hong Kong also has many country parks for hiking.  I am sure that you will love this country!

If you want to find a job for only three months, I suggest you can teach English for summer lesson.  In Hong Kong, most student would like to take some courses in Summer Holiday.  I will get some information for you if you have interest in it.

Write to me if you have fixed your itinerary and looking forward to seeing you in Hong Kong.

Ta
I think public transport is paramount nowadays, but the future will deliver us some kind of different means of transport, such as the car, yes, a car we have been using all our lives.
But this time will be another story because in order to save time and money we are going to use our own car.
Let me explain my reasons, when you drive your car you can take it from your garage or in the main door of your house, and it gets you whatever you want, but on the other hand if you take public transport it will be much more uncomfortable because you must catch the bus in the bus stop... where is your nearest bus stop? Then you must pick the subway to your destination, so that means a waste of time, otherwise is cheaper, but what happens if you don't have some coins to pay the bus driver? Here comes the problem.
You should look for a shop to exchange your money into coins. What's the time, then? Obviously, you are late to work, even if you have an appointment to make an interview for a job.

Alison read the note, smiled,and immediately put on her coat. She read a note from her boyfriend Tom. She must go to a shopping center because Tom is waiting for her in the shopping center. They go to a new film about James Bond. Alison is very happy because she did not see Tom for two months. He must study in a different country, and they not see each other for months. Tom is funding in London. Alison goes to a bus stop and she's waiting for a bus. She can not wait to see Tom. When she arrived at a shopping center Tom is already waiting. They want to spend all evening together. 

The Lion King is my favorite film. It is the story about a little lion and his life. 
Samba is the main character. He must begin to be the king. He lives in the wild. His father saves him of a fight, but he died and Samba is sad. He moves to another place because he didn't want to be on the same place where his father died. But he knows Timon and Rumba, and they get that Samba believe again that life is good. Then, Samba save to Rumba of a lion and this lion is Nala who is an old friend of Samba. They return and Samba gets to be the Lion King.
I would recommend this film because it is funny, entertaining, and you can learn principles.
My name is shushing and live in Montreal, Canada. Alrough Canada is an English country however in Montreal, the official language is French. So I do not have opportunity to practical English Because most of my colleagues speak French. They speak French in the meeting, in the gear, and in the shopping
My favorite sport is running.
When I have a free time I usually run because I feel really relaxed after that.
I started this sport six years ago, and I found myself. When I stop doing it for a week, I feel that there is something missing, and I'm not in a good shape.  
I advise everyone to start this sport. In the fact, I know it's very difficult to do it if you give it up. But it's very important for your health. Running will help you burn calories and make you calm and relaxed.


My favorite sport is football.
I like football because it improves my basic skills and my mind does not take that much stress. Football is perfect because it is an active sport. It is bewildering! I was inspired by a true legend, his name is Dan Hazard. He plays for Chelsea. My favorite teams are Chelsea, Man city, Man united, Real Madrid and Barcelona.

That all I can say. I love football very much
Yes we can say that for car is much convenient. But every person could not be afforded car. Even that price behind fuel for car.
That's first fact. And the second one is that fashion or style of young people who don't like more go somewhere using a car than bike.
After that last point, we cannot go everywhere using a car we would like. That have limitation also there.
Might be Romany people are liking because there are so many service with it. 
but it does not mean that public transport is not having future. That fact behind sense because maintenance of public transport is not responsibility of traveler.  
If we want to count function of public transport because it's not enough words to say. But public transport is most need service in big city as well as small villages. 
It's not so hard to find sights to see in such a big city like Moscow, but when you have a wide variety of museums, parks, clubs, you will try to visit only best ones. Let's look at the most popular places where tourists prefer spending their free time in Moscow. 
I'm sure I'll agree that the Red Square is the most popular sight in capital of Russia. That's why I suggest starting the journey from this place. You can get there by metro (Teatralnaya Station). From the Red Square you can easily see Moscow Kremlin, St. Basil's Cathedral, the State Historical Museum and Gum Trading House. If you are dying of hunger, you can have a quick snack at Tremor caf¨¦ or have a square meal at the restaurant #57, which on the third floor of the Gum. 
I prefer spending my free time in the parks. Gorky Park is my favorite place for my leisure. It's a capital's Central Park where you'll wind lots of interesting affairs. There are lots of facilities such as sports center, ping pong club, hire center etc. There is an open-air cinema, but it opens only after 10.00 PM. 
So, if you want to have a memorable holiday, the capital of Russia is the most attractive place. 
My friend's name is Nadir. He is from Given. He likes playing mobile phone, playing basketball and reading a book. Furthermore, he is hobbies listen to music, play computer game, watch the football match and watch TV. These are my friends hobbies. 
I'd like to talk about my past. I'm only fifteen years old,, but I think I have a heavy past. 
First, I've always lived in a kind of little flat which is a social movement. We didn't have a lot of money,, but I went to a private elementary school. There were a lot of rich people, maybe we were about ten to one hundred, not living in a house. I had a lot of friends, too many friends. At sixth grade, I realized that they didn't really love me, or even like me. I remember two contrast moments : One day we had to create a team to make an exercise which used brain, they chose me. Although, another time, we had to create a team for doing sport, and they didn't choose me.
That get to the second problem I had, and stay now: my weight. They didn't choose me because of my weight. I was too fat, too much fat. I looked at my health booklet one month ago, and I saw that I have been overweight since I'm four years old. Until sixth grade, I thought I was "normal", but then all changed.
Learning English is very important by the future of all. It is a language that many people speak and known.
Many people start learning English at school. Later, the people continue in language schools.
It is a difficult language, so, the best option is to go abroad. 
In an English-speaking country, everyday you learn to live. People speaking different but with a basic level understand English.
It is difficult to go to a place unknown with different people but is a good experience to learn. 
I think if the whole world has only one language would be better. Everyone could speak and understand. Not so, therefore, we must study very English. 

Because of her suggestions, I learned how to control my temper while I was facing with failures and kept telling myself that it wasn¡¯t a big shame because I had had tried my best. Thus, I became more mature because I overcame those hard times. 
I like walking in the morning every day and I enjoy doing it with my own or with my friends, and because it's very useful for my health, and also it keeps my body healthy and full of energy.
Sometimes I feel tired of walking especially in the sunny days with a high temperature, but that can't let me stop doing this sport. 
when I'm walking, that can refresh me all the time and makes me feeling good. I want to give advice to people who love thing type of sport ; please do not let it go, and do it as you can, because it's a benefit sport. 
Hi, everyone. Its good idea to improve my English writing. I'd like to speak to the education process in Egypt.

I have just graduated from faculty of law" English division" from two years ago , with very good grade . The ordinary result of the big effort I had exerted in my university to have good job in my specialization like a lawyer. But in Egypt no one takes his right you should pay a lot of money to have a job or knowing someone use his authority to appoint you.

So, I intended to get a job in another state like Dubai, I heard jobs there is very good and also the compensation. I have submitted my CV in various jobs. But what is the common reply ? Your qualifications are not satisfied, You must be UK Or USA educated.

Finally, I see that I have very high marks in education but not have the ability to work in the real life because in Egypt there is the worst education. 


Thanks. 
 1) I like helping people
2) Tom offered to go to the cinema.
3) Mercy refused borrowing money.
4) Can we afford to purchase a car next year?
5) I look forward to meeting you.
6) The movie I watched made me cry. 
I do not think, it's easy to do research in India. Even if once a time, I want to focus on my work they will create one or the other issue to distract me. I will make my own path, though it will be difficult for me. But it will be very romantic to be with my girlfriend and fight with the system.  
We generally use the word "stress" when we feel that everything seems to have become too much - we are overloaded and wonder whether we really can cope with the pressures placed upon us.

We can change everything hurt us if we need is we have volition

The reasons for stress are more diverse perhaps because we have an exam period, family problems or because we think in negative way, or we destroyed ourselves in long hours of working and cancel dour needs for enough comfortable, and lots of reasons to stress... 

We must get out of the stress quickly before lose ourselves because it's very hurtful period, for example you can read a book, doing sport, play music, eating delicious food, remember all the positive thing was taken place with you, talk about someone who trust for him, take off every thing make you upset and make you life tiring, go out and eat meal with your best joking friends, and there a lot of you have to do... 

Remember the stress is not lasting thing, and you can avoid it 
But if you are willing to live in happy life. 



 Dear Sir, 
I am writing to complain about the cafe-Lunch menu. In my opinion, the main course needs a lack of improvement.
Firstly, I am a vegetarian and I don't have much choice of vegetables. Secondly there are not much variety of dessert mainly fruits and puddings. There is not much variety of healthy drinks,there are not many hot drinks as well.

Some people say that in my college are vegetarian, Muslim,vegan e.c.t, and they do not have much variety of food to choose like halal meat and veg and nothing that comes from animals.

It is considered that you change the type of food regularly. Reduce the fast food that make people obese and not healthy. It will be better if you gave drinks compared to the weather, like whenever its winter we would like a hot drink and if it is summer we would like a chilled drink.

I hope you consider this major problem in the caf¨¦. Thank you.


Yours faithfully 
Dear Mrs Ashby,

I'm writing to you regarding of a letter I've seen on my way home calling for candidates to fill a vacancy in your caf¨¦ staff. As requested, I'm an English-speaking guy and currently looking for a job that doesn't disrupt my studies at college. For that reason, this job is perfectly suitable for me and, besides, it showed up as a good opportunity for me to improve my incoming helping me to pay my bills.

Now I am twenty fiver years old and when I was teenager I lived abroad twice. The first time in London, for 6 months, and most recently in Berlin, for 8 months. 
The movie I¡äm going to be reviewing is "the purge" 
I actually loved it quite a lot, I just loved all the suspense and the parts they leave you hanging, it¡äs just way too interesting, the movie is about the American government who annually gives 12 hours when all crime, even murder, is legal, and there are no medical services during that long period of what they call "the purge" and anyone can join it, you can kill whoever you want. The thing is, some people don't think it¡äs ok, and they don¡ät agree, so they just stay inside and try to survive the night.


The diagrams illustrate the process about producing banknotes.
At the first beginning,banknotes should be well-designed considering the color matching and artwork, including the issues about safety. After designing, metal plates are supposed to be prepared with the help of experienced machinists. Then, it comes to the printing step. Ensuring there is color on both sides, image is increased gently by a certain type of ink. Most importantly, before distribution, printed sheets with 50 banknotes per sheet have to be checked whether they are of perfect quality or not. They can only be packed and distributed when they are with good quality. In other words, both bad sheets and the ones which are separated badly need destroying safely which can stop them from going into the market.
That's how banknotes are produced from paper to the one we can purchase goods in our daily life.
When I was 12, I went to France for the first time in my life.
That was my first time on holiday in another country that wasn't fourth Italy.
I remember I woke up at 6 o'clock for took the train and went to Paris in France.
After 4 hours sat on an uncomfortable seat, we arrived at the train station and then my parents and me went to the hotel.
We visited a lot of monuments, museums and churches, like the Louvre with the Mona Lisa by Leonardo da Vinci.
That week I felt happy and relaxed,, but I was a little sad when we returned to Italy.
I am waiting only to go there another time!

Dear Cuba!
Do your family is happy that you come back? Are you fine? 
I am writing to tell you that I have known my aunt Lisa when I was in London last month. We met each other next to Oxford Street, when I was going to a supermarket. She went with me and we talk about everything! She is very interesting and wise person, but the best is her humor. 
We are going to travel to the France in this holiday. It is fantastic! I can't wait.
Kisses 
Ola
Nowadays using public transport is considered to be the most convenient
way to move around. It provides citizen the freedom to relax and disconnect while going home or to work. However, taking your own car is the much more useful. And for this reason I honestly think it will be the only means of transport in the future.
You also asked about the leisure activities in Spain. 
Well, let me tell that there are lots of ways to have a good time there. For me, the most interesting one is sightseeing around the city and discover its monuments and landmarks. However, there are also an endless of leisure activities such as going shopping or going to museums, to cinemas or to beautiful parks 
If it were not enough, you will be able to enjoy the amazing atmosphere of our nightlife, going to restaurants, to clubs or lounge bars. 

In my town people are very educated and very aware of the environment, they know very well that if we take care of the environment then it will be useful for us only, so they always take care about the rubbishes and try to clean the village. Whenever they are going outside always keeping the plastic bag with them so whatever rubbish thing they will not throw to the road or outside. They always keep the rubbish and dust to plastic bag, and then they throw to dust bin
D.	Perhaps, bilingual school creation might be a good idea of Colombian education improvement, but it will be appropriate to be aware that Colombia actually has public schools with a basic education where English is considered as another academic subject, in contrast with the private ones. Because a majority of don¡ät have enough resources to pay for it. 
The whole picture conveys us the process of making banknotes. It depends on to five main steps which include design, preparation of metal plates, printing,inspection, packaging and distraction or disposal depends on whether the fourth step is good or bad.
Above all, the design is the most previous way we should know, which is considered with the background color and artwork. Secondly, we need preparation of metal plates that subsidiaries with skilled machinists. And the need printing and inspection. Eventually, the most essential part comes out, we need significant the quality of the sheets. If it's good, packing and distribution whereas the others should be destroyed as well.
In conclusion, the whole part of process is an reversed schedule. It consumed the power which contained the humanity and machine. Nevertheless, in my opinion, the most precious of the revolution is the modern security measure through such a muti-developed society.
To begin with is design, we are able to considerate background color, artwork, and security issues, and then, we are supposed to preparing mental plates, such as skilled and machinists.
Secondly, printing--including sheets of banknotes, printed(50 banknotes per sheet). There are some requestion--colour on both sides, special ink, images slightly raised.
The most important step is inspection that the printed sheets should manually inspect. If partially damaged sheets exist, the banknotes should separate into good and bad.
In the end, if it is a good sheet, the procedure is packaging and distribution, including cutting into separate banknotes, packing,dispatching. If it is a bed sheet, the procedure is disposal --bad sheet sand banknotes should be securely destroyed.
I do not know from where I can start. Back in the 40s, Cairo was considered as one of the cleanest and the friendly environmental city around the world, Even cleaner than Paris or other cities in Europe. But the time is changes and things are changing with it. Nowadays, Cairo can be considered as one of - if not the most - the dirtiest city in the world. Rubbish is everywhere, people finish their food and throw empty bags in the streets instead of holding it until they found a trash. So, the ugly truth is my country isn't clean and people do nothing towards this.


In this picture, there is a man behind a counter in a shop. There are lots of guns on the wall.
In the right corner there's a sign which says that in this shop it's not to been allowed to sell knives. 
It is a fact that on the one hand you have the opportunity to buy dangerous weapons nowadays but on the other hand we are unable to manage this situation correctly. It is true that there are an increase in violence in the past,, and it is our duty to tell our children that a world without guns are a better world.
It was late Summer in Africa. Max and his family had been in their holidays for two weeks now, this year they had decided to do a safari as a new experience. Unfortunately, Max was not as excited as his family, he had never been really into animals. He only enjoyed staying at the hotel to watch television.
"Max, wake up!" his mom said. Once he did, he went walking outside the hotel for the first time. Today for some reason he got this feeling that something interesting will happened. He walked and walked, thinking what could it be, until after a long time walking he realized he did not know where he was.
Suddenly, he heard something, was it an animal?, he thought. And then he realized it was an enormous, lion. Max freeze, he did not know what to do. The lion was getting closer and when he reached Max he laid on the floor and looked at the boy. Max for some reason stroked him, and the lion smiled. But suddenly he heard a noise, it was his mum." Max where are you?" she screamed, the lion disappear in one second, running. So Max walked into her, and said "here mom, don¡ät worry, lets go into the hotel."
Max spend the rest of the day thinking in that lion until he got into his room."what a making day!" Max whispered to himself as he got into bed that night.
Dear teacher
I am your new student, Zhen Xuan Wang.
I come from Taiyuan Bade.
I like riding my bicycle in the streets.
Furthermore, I am studying in Young Fend high school.
Not long ago, I won first prize in math competitions in school.

Presidential election will begin in Taiwan next year.
I look forward to the result released.

All the time, we are learning more for our various wishes.
My goal is an admission of National University.

Best regards,
your student, Zhen Xuan Wang.

Continue the study 

any one in the world has future Goal. My ultimate aim is to continue my study. Unfourtunitly my previous study was in Arabic. This matter prevent me from achieving my Goal. The most difficult area in English I suffer from is the writing. I have no issue in reading speaking or lesioning. 

As part of my plan to improve the English skills, I decided to search on the internet for any free program which can help me for the improvement plan in the English writing. 

I found your website and this is my first try. 



.
There are many differences between old computers and the new ones. For example, new computers are smaller than the old computers, also they are faster and more efficient, they have better resolution and a bigger memory to save files another staff like apps
Trieste is a little town situated in the northeast of Italy. We have diversified harvest like in the rest of the world, not only in the houses but also in every public building. For example, in our school there is the possibility to collect paper and plastic in different boxes. In the last year some political men have decided to put in order our city, so for example they put again to place the roads. In the middle of the principal street, that is next to the sea, there is a divider with a lot of flowers and plants. So the ambient impact is very attractive. We have still many problems to solve in our city. There aren't boxes for rubbish in every condominium, and we haven't the harvest of the dampness that is present in many other towns of Italy. Another problem is that the citizen of Trieste don't pay attention to the ambient problems of their city. For example, when a man or a woman has ended to smoke, he/she throws the earth cigarette not in the right box. In other countries it would be impossible, because if someone wanted to do this, he'll receive a bill to pay. I think it would be important that, not only in the family, but also in the school could be grown a new generation sensible to ecological problems of the earth. In this way we can have the possibility to change.
Hi.

Today, a lot of people do sports, but all sports are not amused.It¡äs great for me to write about the sport and health.

When I was child I usually play with my friends of football. I sometimes played at break of school in the morning. This sport was very happier for me but a day I broke my leg, and then I never played more of football.

I have to go jogging a few years ago. I have often finished very tired because I never do sport. Because in occasions It¡äs very bored.

Although I go jogging I also do other sport, the swimming. I began practice this sport three years ago when I lost my work. I usually go two days a week but the next month I am going to go three or four days a week because I hope to be a local competition. Furthermore, I go swimming in a public pool. The public pool is near my house.

On the one hand This sport is good for my health, I stay fit. On the other hand, I have met a lot of people, they are very friendly.


And finally only I tell you that you should do some sport, It is good for us life.

See you.
Jerry read the email and decided to go to the shopping center immediately. At this moment, he had waked up. He noticed that he is trembling, "it was just a dream" - he thought. He had another week to find a birthday present. His uncle's birthday hounding him because he doesn't know what he should buy for him. He already had inquired about this all the family, nobody hasn't idea which would be good enough. Then he found that he just will go to the fishing shop and request for help shop assistant. As he thought, as he's done. It was a great idea! The man was professional, and gave him accurate pieces of advice. He had bought the best of all presents. Uncle Tom was delighted and proud of me. Off the top of his head, he had asked his nephew to go to the fishing together. Jerry said that he would be privileged. It emerged that that young boy have a good head for fishing, and now they are always go to the fishing together.
I don't have a favorite sport. I practice a lot of sports, and now I'm going to tell all over them.
Furthermore, I like running, ride my bike, playing football, skiing at winter, climbing, etc.
What I like to run is to go to the mountain and enjoy the landscape.
What I like to go bike is doing routes and very long paths.
I like football because it is a sport that I practiced from small, and I think that is the team sport more fun and exciting.
I like skiing because it is a sport that I also did from small, I like large speeds and lower living at high altitudes and enjoying great landscapes.
Furthermore, I like to climb,, but it is a sport that I just started ... but I want to keep practicing it and keep learning new things.

The issue of taking care of the environment is very topical in the modern world. Amount of garbage is increasing at the same time with increasing amount of humans. The growth of consumption in developing countries leads to increasing consumption of more energy, water and other sources. Pollution of the ecosystems is growing to in these countries as a result. 
These problems are topical in our city Kyiv to. Nowadays, our local government is making some decisions for improving the situation. It is going to build several modern combustion plants, some programs for discrete rubbish collection are implementing. There are a lot of citizens movement except official activities. People organism common action for cleaning warehouse territories. Some activists plant out trees in spring. These activities especially have a place in spring and in autumn. 
I hope that most of the big enterprises, plants and stations will be taken out of the city border.
this day's the transportation become so crawdad .we have a lot of cars in the streets. There are a lot of accidents because many people driving so fast. We should put many cameras in the street to know how is caused of these accidents. If everybody know that there are a punishment for what they do and nobody can escape from what he did, I guess we will have a few of transportations accident.
Everyone is circus about making banknotes. Now I will talk about THE PROCESS OF MAKING banknotes.

The banknotes is designed considerately, workers need to design it backgrounds color and artwork. What¡¯s more, the notes will also be printed ONB security issues. Then, the notes will be prepared with metal plates. After that, printing, the notes will be printed in color on both sides with special ink, and it will image sightly raised. A new piece of banknotes is printed completely. Good part of them will be packaged and disturbed.workers all cut them and deal with them carefully. Rest of them will be disposaled. 
Dear Jo,
I think that C¨¢diz is perfect place to meet, because C¨¢diz has coasted, sea, and Mounties. The people are very kind and funny, and is a very cheap city.
In C¨¢diz, in summer there are a lot of opportunities to work. C¨¢diz is a beautiful city, and you would enjoy a lot of ifs worked here.
C¨¢diz has got a lot of amazing beaches.  Almost, you are a great athlete so, You could teach surfing, football or other sports.
On the other hand, in C¨¢diz there are a lot of bars, so, you could find a job with waiter.

I hope I helped you.
Since I was seven years old that I am on my city's basketball team, and I have no doubt that playing basketball is one of the things that I enjoy the most in my life.
I like basketball because, besides the benefit that it brings to your health and physical-well being, it is also a perfect hobby.
Another reason why I like it is because it is a team sport,, so you can learn and evolve with them.
You also get to meet a lot of people in tournaments or even in normal games.
I really think that everyone should try it because it is fun and healthy.
Dear Mr. Yoda
I am writing this letter for a complaint about the CPU that I bought last week. I order 2 NVIDIA GTX 1080 but until now I don't have my order in my hand.
I need the CPU as soon as possible and before 17 March 2017. If until 17 March my order not come, yet I will cancel my order and I want 100% refund for my money. I think you should be more on time, or you will get a bad rating from your costumer. Thanks for all, and I want my money back if I not yet get my CPU. I hope I will get me order and I hope you all be more on time for the costumer order shipping. Thank you

your Sincerely
Nowadays, people are getting more independent, and more than this problem, society now needs to show the other this independence and control of their own lives, which includes cars, houses and materials.
On the one hand, travelling by car can be an excellent way to move yourself to where you want to go, without going on foot to find your bus station and becomes less important if you live in the center of your town or in the suburbs. Another advantage of travelling by car is that you don¡ät have to spend time waiting for your other transport, as also as you can avoid the confusion of people that are in the subway stations every morning to get in the line you want to arrive at work in time.
On the other hand, public transport are the only resource some people have to move on, and more than excellent to the environment, it¡äs also a good way to avoid traffic and spend money on petrol, once it¡äs cheaper if you catch a bus. Another disadvantage is that using the car can be useless in some situation, like if you go to a football game by car, you probably won¡ät have a place to park it.
In conclusion, cars won¡ät let public transports be forgotten, once more than providing the only way some people have to travel, cars aren¡ät so convenient for some situations.
I think you must go to a large school in the town because here you can have more friends, and you can do a lot of other things that you can do in the countryside.  I really want to go to a big school in the town because here in the countryside I can go out with my friends or go shopping with them.  If the town, you can do everything fun.  You can go to the shopping, to the half pipes, to the skate parks, and you can do a lot of other cool things with your friends but in the countryside no.  
But you must go to the school that you want, this is just my advice, ok?
I really want you to be happy with your new life.  A big kiss and a big hug
Anna
I think that the family and friends are the most important in our lives because if you have some problems they are always here, and they try to help you. These people can influence in our life, for example, if you have a bad friend you become a bad person, and you will have problem in your life. So, your education depends on the people around you. It is not important if these people are friends or family, they can change our lives for better or worst, depend on you choose the best thing that it can help you.
As we know, in our days, everything is possible. We have so many advantages that make our lives easier. Even the way of studying has changed. In general, people have the possibility to study in libraries or using the computers.
Studying in libraries asks a lot of quiet and patience. There you mustn't speak Lauder, and you always have to wait for your turn to borrow something, or you have to wait if another student has the book you need.
Personally, I think studying on a computer, it's a better choose. I'm not saying that just because of the easy way by, you can study what you want. Studying using a computer offers you the possibility to be more relaxed when you do it. In this way, you can maybe read aloud.
If I were a student that usually studies in a library, I would definitely try to study on a computer. In this way, I wouldn't waste a lot of time.
If somebody says that there is no future for public transport, I mind immediately. Today there are too many vehicles in our streets. The roads are chock-a-block. Everybody has a private car. People are thinking about comfortable life instead of environment and cost saving.
Hi, Shannon:
About my town in the future. It will be very different. Meanly, the change in the environment.
Also, every year, there are more companies that produce different types of pollution in our planet.
For this, I think that the climate will change in 20 years.
Therefore, the animals do not survive with this climate. Also, the humans can't go to the Street all day, only a few hours for the hot climate. The live there will be harmful for everybody!
We need to do something to same the world!
What do you think about this?
Take care, 
Conch.
The members of my Family are certain my real best friends, whose I can trust and ask everything without shameless or regrets.
I think they are our first friends and our first confident. 
All days they prove they are the persons whose care about me. 
Think about family's routine. Every morning they take breakfast together, speaking about things not too important. They listen to you, discuss our problems. 




Sorry for taking too long to get back to you, it's the end of the quarter, and you know how crazy is this period for a salesman.

Yes, you can share my contacts. I would like to understand the benefits of an MBA at IMD and how it would help me on my career.

Talking about the world cup a little. Watching to our national teams games, I got the conclusion that we have no need to check our heart condition. Brazil and Nederland games were a real test for our health. What do you think?

I appreciate your support.

Kind Regards.
Hi my name is Adrian I am 17 years old and I am footballer. I was born to be a footballer. We were playing everyday football in the school, and I was the best. I was even better than the older children everyone was telling me to go to a team. But i didn't had to do anything, a team took when I was 11 years old. The name of the team was Katia. I was at this team for 5 years and they made me even better in football. I played my first match at 16 years old and I felled very special because I was 16 and I was capable of putting 3 goals. I played so good that everyone gave me congratulations but that's not all one of the best team of the world wanted to take me. Furthermore, I was very happy, and of course I agreed.
For my opinion, I'm definitely agreed with that. Already, for only 20 years, a lot of things because of the technology.
And I think that in's not a technology will change but the people and their characters themselves. Unfortunate, for this generation there won't be a real relationship, all relation will become a virtual relationship.
The good news is the average of people who can take advantage of the technology can economize a lot of time because they might have a sophisticate robot can help at home.
According to my experience, if we don't exaggerate the way we use technologies like internet, phone, satellite. It will be the good thing that we can spend our time for a good thing
In some people¡¯s lives, the most important is to wear fashionable clothes.

On the one hand, I think it is important to look good, but sometimes the latest fashion is not the best choice to feel happy and comfortable. For example, now the high-yield shoes is very trendy, but it costs a lot and the most woman doesn¡¯t look good in it.

On the other hand, the personality is more important and determinative than an expensive dress, it is a fact. But if somebody wants to follow the latest fashion, I accept it, because she just in those clothes feels good.

In conclusion, my opinion is that the personality is more important than the clothes we wear, but everybody has his own life and a choice to decide what she wants.


Transportation is one of the most essential part of our day-to-day life; whether it is public or private, transport takes the same priority in each one's life from the very early days. Basically, we've land, water and air transport for reliable purpose.
In the age before the industrialization came in to existence, people were also using various alternatives to travel from one place to another. They mostly depend on animal to make cart to ride on them. Then the technology improved gradually towards mechanical engines to make the transport more convenient. The developed version of all those engines are use in the running vehicles of land, water and air which make our life faster.
But in this modern era of globalization, global warming is one of the prime concern of the earth. And when we look at the modern technologies of transportation, it glances no future for public transport.
It is inevitably true that, excessive use of public transport leads to higher level of pollution. So, it would be better to go for any other alternative of green technology for future purpose to make this world a better place.
Yesterday, I had a wonderful day . In the morning I went to a Galician basketball training with a coach of Spanish selection, when finished went to my parents to a hotel to eat and stay with some friends, after the food meet with friend¡äs of my parents and went to a theme park, and we rode to a rollers' coaster, it was very exciting, and we ate a chocolate ice cream, it was delicious. At night, we went to a match of Spanish basketball league, Obrador versus Real Madrid and that match won the team of Real Madrid, and then I went home to sleep.
This is my wonderful day.
When I find me in London, I'm going to the Buckingham Palace located in the City of Westminster, and I'll see your art gallery and tourist attraction of the British monarchy
continue in London, I will visit to the largest parks in London, the Hyde Park that having a full day of guided outdoor games and activities for preservation thereof park
follow in London I'll go for a walk to arrive at the Big Ben that is the most beautiful building in all its splendor when I will take pictures
later, I'll take the underground of London that is a public fast transit system, I'm trailing in it
when I'll leave of the underground in the station Wembley park I'm going to the Wembley Stadium where I will enjoy an evening of football, the match started at 8:00pm 

My favorite band is "CBR", it's a Brazilian band, the type of music is rock and rap, your's music are very easy to single. I really like, in the moments when I am listening turn up the radio, but the singles are died.
I like my family and my friends. For that, does a pleasure speak about them!
I am starting to introduce my favorite family members. My sister is older than me, two years. She has an important person to me since my 8 years. Our parents separated in 1980, when I was 8 and when she was 10. Since this time, we stayed very linked until now. We have a good relation, she is my main friend. She knows all about me. My father is the other person important to me. I appreciate his a lot, because he stayed with me and my sister and his life changed completely. He invested in our education, and today he has much admiration on our life and our decisions. When I became, first teenager and after an adult, I knew the majority of my friends, a good friend. We keep a regular contact, we go out to dinner or take a coffee many times. More recently, I cannot forget my husband and my daughter. Both are very important in my emotional stability. In fact, I feel they are the most important people in my life!  
Hello Stefan!
How are you? Hope everything's fine, all here is great. It's been so long since we last talk...and I have some great news!
Well, I'm writing to tell you that this summer I'm going to the UK, and I'd like to hang out with you some time!  It'll be the second time I'll visit the UK, and I wouldn't like to do the same excursions, so would you mind telling me some good activities to do or some places to visit there?
Also, I'd like to invite you to my house here in Spain, all my friends and I are having a party, and it'll be fantastic if you were able to come. Hope to see you soon
Love, 
Rosa

 Our world is very polluted by public transport,, so we think about what will happen in the future. Public transport causes many problems in our environment such as, difficult reaching to the nearest destination, the pollution, and causing diseases. We must think alternative solutions for this problem.
 
                  We face difficulty in reaching in our own destination. Many people who go to their work late. Hence, if everyone has a private car, he can go to his work on time.  Using the public transport makes us arrive late because it stops many times. With our private car, we can do many tasks in our day, but using buses we waste our time, and more efforts.  
                   Buses run with petrol that causes pollution. Nowadays, there are some vehicles run with electricity. We can decrease pollution by using electricity. Hence, this will help people to be in a good health.
 In addition, crowded buses cause affection among people. Private cars reduce the affection. Crowded buses spread epidemic in our society.
 Finally , we hope a healthy future for our new generations. We want to reach our destination on time and live in safe life without diseases and pollution.
My favorite sport is volleyball.I play it since 2006.my best position is number 2.I used to play it in faculty of engineering selection.it makes me fit and long. I like it very much. I used to play it with my fringes. When I enter the Egyptian armed forces, I played for the air defense forces team. We won the 1st position, and got the cup of competition. If anyone attends to play this game, he should practice hard to be able to play it professional.
Further to the trade fair of the last week when we were a pleasure to meet you, and we were talking about your courses.
I am looking for an organizational development course.
Could I have contact with any of your customer for more information?
I am available to talk with you on Monday in the morning.
I am looking forward to confirmation. 
My favorite sport:
When I was a child, about four or five years old, my father teaches me what was football, and I loved it but, I really liked the goalkeepers, why I like football since childhood.
I think football shows you a lot of feelings and experiences.
I enjoy football because it is a form to forget problems and enjoy a bit, because when you are playing football, you aren't thinking other stuff, you only are concentrate at the game.
Football is a sport where anything can happen, no always win the best teams and is unpredictable, there isn't a dream team.
The football is a good form to do exercise because it is interesting and funny.
And if you don't like to do sport, you can watch the matches of the teams around the world.
The most important invention is the mobile, because you can do whatever you want in only one communication device. Today, it's smaller, faster and cheaper than before. Not only children have one, grandparents have either. But with this gadget, we have a big problem: people are becoming isolated, we are living in our own world.
You can do a lot of things using your mobile, like: call someone, text, take pics, listen to music, watch movies, play games, wake you up (alarm clock), access the internet, check your e-mails, pay your bills, access the social media, learn how to cook...there are many more unthinkable things we can do.
But now, children want to have one as soon as possible, they don't play hide and seek and play sports like before. And one consequence of this is they have health problems.
Another problem is if your mobile is stolen, the thief can access all your personal life, he can check your e-mail, see your photos, etc.
And people are getting isolated, once I saw a mother using your mobile instead of taking care of her baby! This is so sad!
In the future, it will probably we can almost everything using mobile, but we might pay attention in how this affects our life.
The pie charts illustrate the amount of household earnings allocation within regular families in two different years (2000 and 2010)

Overall, in both years, the amount of earnings allocation predominantly from Housing then followed by food/clothes. There were a significant rise in the number of budget allocation from both categories (Housing and food/clothes) in 2000 and 2010. In contrast, vacation/leisure and Misc were decrease over the same period of time.

Regarding the pie charts, there were significantly increased in the number of earnings allocation for Housing and Food/Clothes from about 35% and 25% in 2000 to about 50% and 35% in 2010 respectively. 

However, the allocation of household budget for Misc, which was the least among other categories in 2010 (around 15%), fell by 10% in 2010 from around 15% to approximately 5% respectively. Furthermore, there was a slight decrease in Vacations/leisure allocation from 25% in 2000 to around 10% in 2010 
Actually, the public transport show really no future. The governments didn't have been giving good ideas to improve the public transport.

There are two good reasons for doing not use public transport in the future. Firstly, the no continue the construction of more rail line of train to public transport is a one reason. Secondly, people don't like the old buses in the city center. Consequently, people prefer to move in your own car.

On the other hand, I think there are two aspects that can change the actual situation. The first is, The government can create a new plan OS construction of trains. The second aspect is, people can help to pay more tax to buy new buses. As a result, we can have public transport more comfortable.

In my opinion, the public transport can have future if all we collaborate us to improve. Unless we do so, I believe no future for the public transport. 
It is a story of a boy, who always find out the way to tease her sister such. One day he got fight with her sister, even he made her cry. Both of them stop talking to each other and after some day the boy need laptop of her sister such. Sukh was so angry with him because he hear her a lot, such refuse to give her laptop and her brother start again fighting with her, and even he slapped her sister. Sukh start crying, and she said she is not going to give you my laptop until you don't feel sorry. Her brother pick her laptop and threw it and broke her laptop, then the boy closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
In my opinion, people's lives will change dramatically in 50 years or so, because the world is changing all the time, and we have a lot of technology and things to do.
 People change their way of thinking and try to do new things. What is more, they do not have the same things as their parents did. To sum p It honk it is inevitable.
The door of the room is closed. Number's room was 666. He knew that she was inside, waiting for the last conversation in relation with the life of Rose. He pushed the door and come in. She was sitting on the chair. When she saw him, she smiled. Then she started talking: "Welcome pretty boy, I am waiting for you, please sit down". He took a chair, staring her with rage. "As you well know, rose's life is in your hands" she said and keep talking:"... You are the only one, that can save her life, but before you must comply with your promise"." I know it" he replied with a sad tone. Then she took the document and stared reading in aloud voice:" With this agreement your soul is mine". Micheal did not know what to think. He loved rose with his entire soul, a soul that is losing. Suddenly, he took the agreement and signed with his blood the paper. I do not care he thought, maybe I lost my soul, but now she is alive. After that, Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake. 
On the last vacation I went to France, to Paris with my colleague Sebastian for 2 weeks. On the first day in France, we bought a French croissant for breakfast. Then we went to the stadium Parc des Princes where we could not reach, 
and due to lack of knowledge of the language, nobody won't tell us which way to walk to the stadium. By accident, we ran into a good fairy who, with the young, learned to all language in the world and thus led our stadium. 
We made friends with this fairy after one entire day walking with her feel like you, we knew each other a lifetime. After the first week in France found that in Paris there is a large crowd. For this reason, we left with a new friend to Marseilles, where there was less traffic. We chose this city because of no input into the sea, and it was filmed taxi in which he played a famous actor. After spending two weeks with a fairy in France, we had to go back to school and fairy to do. End.
Dear Jos¨¦,

How are things? I have finished my exam yet. I came back to Linares two days ago. When do you return? 
I took bad diet. You might come with me! The exam had made that I don't practice much sport. For me, the sport is very important. 
I believe that I am a boy healthy, but with all the exams I have abandoned to goods habits of me life. I didn't have time free. Do you practice sport this year? How is eating?


Today I will speak with my manager. I will intend drive less, and I go to places for mys heft. I will buy a bicycle. Furthermore, I play bike in the weekend. My mum says that I don't eat fruits or vegetables never,, so I will eat more fruits or vegetables.

In my opinion, the Diet of Gym is very bored. Do you know new recent for cooking chicken? Do you remember Peter? He is very muscular now. He told me to play sports every day. One day will be like him. 

We meet soon man. Take care!

Fran. 
Last year I was in London with my friends, Elena, Am¨¦lie and Ariana. At first, we went to our hotel. It is near to the Hyde Park. We went to the Hyde Park and sat down on a bank. An hour later, we went to the London Eye. It is really very, very big. In the London Eye, we can look all over London. It is a very big city. Then we go to the Big Ben. The clock is very big, and we stood there a long time. Then we go to a red bus and drove to our hotel. London is a very exciting city. 
Speaking about reading. Reading is one of the most important habits. Reading opens new horizons, made you imagine. One of the most favorite books for me is, the power of your subconscious mind. This book tells you how to use the power of your mind, and how to make yourself happier. 
I wish I could spread the idea of reading among young people. Reading is a must for having a great nation. 
Letter written to report, about awful environment situation in my city!
 Kiev, Ukraine. 
we already did a lot, but still to do more needed.
first, rubbish factories should be sent behind the city
people who litter on the streets its one of the biggest problems. 
So my proposition is to post some informative letters and posters around the city, and give bigger punishment for littering!Also, from the government side to increase of trash bins and facility staff members.
Clients search, customers support, conflicts solutions
 compilation of wedding arrangements and bouquets
People used to use public transport a lot. Public transport is very inconvenient. Gas prices have come down a lot. People can afford cars easily.  Some people live very far from the bus stop. They have to walk a long distance to get to the bus stop. Buses are very crowded. Buses take a very long route. It takes you very long time to get to your destination. If you have a car, you can get to your destination in a short time.
Our town takes care of the environment of our neighborhood very seriously. There are many places where you can throw away your rubbish. On these sites there are different kinds of containers for all sorts of rubbish which you can collect at home. Like glass, plastic or paper -containers. The center of our town, where the supermarket is, does also have a site for dumping your rubbish.
In the supermarket, you can find a container for batteries. Not only the supermarket has these containers, they are also in the schools of the neighborhood. In my opinion, this gives a good example of the involves of the local government.
Another point where I'm pleased about is that our town is kept clean by a special group of employees of our community. This happens weekly. They walk around in all the streets and pick up all the dumped material. This makes our neighborhood a pleasant place to be.
For the last, I can say that they not also put containers for all your rubbish, but even special containers in the parks for the dogs their 'pooh'. So this helps that the children could play in a much cleaner park.

Studying overseas is not only changing condition, but also facing many sorts of unknown pressure. Roughly speaking, there are three causes of pressure. First, the biggest problem is studying. It is not easy to adapt to a new learning environment, the language is the biggest difficulty. Students have to do assignments with another language and use different thinking manner. The second problem could be from peers¡¯ stresses. The culture shock is that international students need to overcome. Students want to make new local friends, but cultural customs and taboos could be a problem to be noticed and adapt. Lastly, the problem is from students themselves. Leaving comfort zone, and everything is fresh. Students have to confront and get over every challenge. As family and friends do not accompany, students must do a lot, from basic living to future studies. It is hard to live overseas alone, Therefore, making friends from the same country can assist one another. Besides, attempting open mind. To get along with international friends is a great way to expand the horizon.
To: Tourist Office
From: Eliza Anna
Subject: Shopping facilities 


Report on the shopping facilities in Katowice


Introduction
The aim of this report is to describe and assess shops, which could be interesting for tourists. The majority of people visiting Katowice are focused on three matters: souvenirs, fashion and food.

Souvenirs
It seems that there are not many places in city center where you can find souvenirs like postcards or books about the history of Katowice. Fortunately, visitors would find all of that in the Tourist Information Office and in shops on the outskirts. The one, which is really worthy to see is "Kato-Sovenirs". They provide all sorts of funny local gadgets.

Fashion

My favorite sport is football. It's the most popular sport all over the world. I enjoy it because it's well known and easy to find partners to play with. Watching football is also a wonderful experience. My favorite international league is the English premiere league. My advice to anyone who will start this sport is to start it early and play it regularly, not to lose fitness. Also, joining a team will be a great idea.
Travelling by car is more comfortable than public transport, easier and faster.
You can go by your car and at any time, but you can¡¯t buy public transport.
You must not wait for your car,, but you must wait the public transport.
You do not pay any fees to travel by your car.
The aim today is to provide you with the description of a best friend.
Kike is my best friend, I met him when we were studying in the primary school, then we were six or seven years old. Afterward, we went to do study at different schools, so, we were separated for ten years.

Moving on to the physical description, I want to talk about that Kike is a man really high, his height is 1.95 meters. He has a strong voice. That with his appearance, looks him impressive.

Concerning his personality, he is very friendly, generous, optimistic, playful and sensitive.

So, he is a hard working, he is lawyer and always help me with all my professional problems.

I want to turn to his hobbies, when he isn't working, he is riding on a bike, every evening he takes the bike and rides across some paths for more than forty kilometers by day, so he is very good rider and it's quite strong to ride with him.

To conclude, I want to say that I'm the godfather of his eldest son. 
My wife is a very special person to me, I like her very much. I met her in University 20 years ago, She is 4 years younger than me. She is in her 30s.
She is tall, Slim and straight. In addition to that She has a pretty face, dark skin, black eyes and long brown hair. 
She is very kind, sensitive and quiet She also has an attractive personality and a big heart, but she is very nervous.  She makes a great food for us, I like to cook with her and eat from her hand; She always work hard for our family.
I like to go out with her, walking and talking. 
Young people are the most interested in fashion and computer games. Girls usually follow the fashion blogger and the fashion magazine. Boys like following the channel on YouTube. They like take pattern modeled on older people, who are popular on the Internet. Teenagers are interested in music too. They like to exchange their opinions about new star. People who are fan clubs interested in touring their idols. In this age, people like being better than their friends, and they like to distinguish oneself. 

Hi, my name is John Keats, and I'm aged 21. I am writing to apply for your job offer.
I have already worked in summer camps in France and in Italy for children aged 7-13. Furthermore, I am cheerful, energetic and hardworking. Furthermore, I usually work in the kitchens,, so it does not bother me. Moreover, I am willing to help organize sports or evening activities.
Besides, I do like looking after children. For instance, I take care of my nephews once a month because nowadays, my brother is often busy.
I can go all over the USA without any problems and I can help the staff to get around if needed since I have the driving license.
Therefore, I think that I am the suitable person for the job.
last night, i went to a restaurant with my family.
L love the place, nice decoration of restaurant.
The waiter come to us and took the order.
My family ordered the dinner, but l ordered specially pizza and coke because l love pizza.
We ate the food and enjoyed a lot.
L love that day spent with my family.
L wish l have come at weekends with my family and friends.

This report is about how my city takes care of the environment. The evolution of my city is more or less similar to the evolution of my country.

I am living in the center of Spain, in a small city. When I was a child, my city was dirty because people were throwing their rubbish on the floor. However, a few years ago the government has paid more attention to the environment to our country; for example they made a lot of advertisement on television, in newspapers and on the internet to explain that the rubbish is not good for our world.

Nowadays, we can see in all street a lot of bins, and it is difficult to see rubbish on the floor because many people are cleaning the city. Also, children must clean their school once a month. These types of actions produce good habits in our society.

In the future, we must do an effort to improve our environment because we will want to give the same world or if it is possible a better world than before to our sons.
 Nobody can deny that transportation is one of the most important things in our life. No country can live without transportation, as it's the real meaning of connection between each other. Cars are much convenient, but this not mean that all other means of transportation are not important. Sometimes many people want to travel faraway along distances, so they need planes. Other people prefer to travel by trains as it's faster and more comfortable than cars. Many countries like to travel by bikes in order to decrease the pollution which happened by car exhausted.to my point of view I prefer travelling by cars which is more comfortable. Now in every country we have the lot of transportation means as planes, trains, undergrounds, cars,ships, and rockets. Public transportation is the mean reason to delivery people everywhere in a small-time. In the past they had to use camels to travel which waste lot of time and tiredness.  
Today, our life is running by clock. We need a vehicle to reach our work place. If we use our public transport services.
We may be late to office/working place. So we must use the personal vehicle. Everybody thinking like the public transport is not comfort for us, but environmentally the public transport is suitable to decrease the pollution and our energy sources also decrease.
 In Lublin is a beautiful castle. It is my favorite place in Lublin. It is located next to the Old Town.
 Furthermore, it was built in twelfth century. The castle's look is in the Neo-Gothic style. At the castle is Holy Trinity Chapel. It is in a Gothic style. It was built as a foundation of King Casimir the Great. This is one of the most valuable monuments in Poland. There is a tower by the castle in the Roman style. This tower is a precious monument of roman art, and it is one of the oldest building in the Lublin. It was a part of the borough Castellano. The castle also has a courtyard. Now on, the castle is a museum. It to belong to the oldest and the biggest museums in eastern Poland. This museum has a monument of the superiority. 
 In my opinion it's the one of the most fascinating places in Poland and the most wonderful site in Lublin. I think that everyone should visit this castle.


The restaurant that I will talk is Woody Pool.
 Woody Pool is in Spain.
This restaurant has a good atmosphere because it is always people laughing and talking about funny things .
The food in this restaurant is very good and has a subnormal size because it is much bigger than the useful food.
The famous dish of this restaurant is a huge hamburger
This restaurant will be an amazing place to the call meet there because like I said before the atmosphere and food are amazing.
In my opinion, public transport will become more and more important in the future. Travelling by car maybe is convenient, but it also brings air pollution and traffic jams. If in a city there were only cars, the city wouldn't afford enough parking lots and roads, all the cars would jam the city, and people wouldn't get their destinations. On the other hand, cars need more gasoline than buses which let out CO2 and other kinds of waste gases into the air, leading to the serious air pollution. So, what we need is to devote much more money and time to improve the public transport. Public transport will have bright future; on the contrary, travelling by car will vanish from our life.
My favorite way is Train.
Plane is fastest in another way to travel.
However, plane is the most dangerous way to travel.
Boat is the cheapest in another way to travel.
However, boat is slowest way to travel.
So, train is intermediate way to travel.

 


My favorite sport is boxing. Because I like boxing. I like to fight, because I like to hit someone.
I start this sport when I was 11 years old, my dad let me go to box and I start that sport. Then I started to go with my friends. I started leading Trever in the competition and I love this sport. My favorite boxer is Floyd May weather. He is very good on this sport. 




  


Today, the people use more cars, which leads to more cars on the street, traffic and pollution. I think is better the idea that the people to use public transportation instead of using private cars or motorcycles

Firstly, people do not have to buy their own cars. Accordingly, people do not have to spend lots of money on gas that they have to fill the tank. Also, they do not have to find a place for parking as well.

Therefore, these are the reasons why I agree with the form to lower the congestion and air pollution by encourage people to use less private cars and turn to use more public transportation and other forms of transportation
It was a cold day at night when I was at home watching my favorite program on my telly called "dare to win", I was with my brother, when we decided to call, The program is about questions for the contestants that must be answered in correct time, and there is a different thing for the winner. A few minutes later we were listening ourselves in the program, we were so nervous, but it was exciting for us, our goal in the program was got a free ticket for the most popular electronic party in the world.
Despite our nervous, we did it well! And our dream come true, yeah, we'll be glowing in the dark!
Funding for the English Language Club

As the secretary of the English Language club I am writing you this proposal to persuade you as to why it would benefit both the students, and the college if we would receive funding from you. 
Dear sir or madam,

I am writing to play for the job in the USA, published in an advertisement, last Monday.
I had recently finished my course of English in Cambridge, also I have a fresh and improve English. 
In order to help to organise on sports and evening activities, I am a young person of 12 years old.


 


Many people say that there is no future for public transport as cars are now so much cheaper and easier to buy. Additionally, because public transport is expensive and does not have a comprehensive coverage of most cities, private cars are more attractive for most people.
Dear Bob.
I went to our new shopping center last week at the downtown. Actually, I am very happy to tell you that we have a lot of new stores, including Apple's store. Long ago we had no stores to buy products or whatever were our needs. However, from now one we can buy what we really need, on the other hand this shopping may help a lot of people get back working again. A few weeks ago I went into Apple's store, so that I bought a new mobile phone, it is awesome because it has reliable tools which allows me doing my daily working. 
Dear Anne. Thanks for your letter asking about my family and my Friends. Saying that, my family is the best, and they love me much. I have a father, a mother and a brother. My brother lives in Barcelona with him girlfriend, and he is very happy with her. I live with my parents in Garter, and I am very happy as they help me. Also, I have very Friends. They are wonderful because they are always when I need them.
Nowadays, It is possible to find any kind of TVs programs you want and yes, I consider that there is very much sport on television, but, not too much.
The way of life of people has begun more and more stressful. When somebody to get at home, he wants only relax in front of Television.
Besides this, TVs companies have understood sports provides this relaxes moment, mainly for men. Then It put on Television more and more sports programs.
In this view, I consider, though, there are lots of sports on Television, they are not too much, because the people have look for it.
In conclusion, I think that TVs companies only want to sell their product and the people want to have their relax moment with the sports programs.

Last summer, we went to C¨®rdoba to attend a very important dance competition...
We left from our city on Monday, and we arrived in Carlos Pay on Thursday. We stayed in one of the most beautiful hotels in that place, with a nice view and with nice people around.
When the day came, we performed an amazing choreography, and we went back home with 3 gold medals.
We really enjoyed this experience, just because we shared it as friends, and we took dance lessons with the most professional and privileged dance teachers of the world.

The album American Beauty/ American psycho is the sixth album released this year by the well-known American rock band Fall out boy that has a huge follower in several countries.
The album, with eleven tracks that reach top one, won a gold and silver certifications for the best-selling in diverse countries as the USA, Canada and the UK.
This American band is known for their lyrics that hold something different from other the band's something close to an emotional statement. 
Even in these album's that the band abandon their own root and add a bite of the pop genre in it.
I really recommend this album because of the lyrics and the sound because it catches you, almost like a great poetry.
I agree with the statement that people's life will change dramatically in the next years, for visible reasons that I will explain in following text.
Firstly, the biggest reason that people's live will extremely change in the future is because of technology. Technology is increasing in all the world. New technology has improved systems in many areas' of society, mainly in Information Systems. The Information through of the Internet, had been each day more quickly, and it is reaching all parts of the world.
Furthermore, the things and process is in evolution. Life of people is turning easiest and comfortable. On industries, the big machines are making new products for our welfare.
Although, the advancement of technology, besides that bring advantages for everyone, it's also will cause disadvantages, such as unemployment because machines will make the same or work better than humans. 
that's why I agree that people's life will change dramatically in the next 50 years.
USA Summer Camp, I am interested in the vacancy of the summer camp. I'm a cheerfully, diligently and organized person. And also I love children. I am accustomed to work with children because the last two summers I worked in summer camps and I have two little sisters that I love them and which I spent a lot of hours take care of them. I am a hardworking and a committed person in all aspects. They are the reason why I'm great for this job. Also, the last summers helped me to be preparing on more things that the children demand children. For an example, I learned about the organization, how to control big groups of children, and entertaining activities for children. I hope you get interested In my application. I will be waiting for your answer,, and thank you for the time.
Nowadays, cost to buy a car that can take the whole family is not expensive anymore. Car is not an expensive thing to have anymore. As we know, the privilege of having travel by car is more convenient than by public transport. We could stop in everywhere we want to stop. We could visit every place with no limitation time.
If there was someone who asked me, "What is your favorite sport? And why do you enjoy it?" I would tell that my favorite sport is soccer, and it could let me know how important the team work is, and I could always feel that there was a kind of power, like someone putting me into the water from the high place, to push me running and kicking the ball. I had to say that feeling was really awesome. It made me feel like that happiness is running throughout my body.
I will suggest people who want to start this sport, first you must find five to six friends to make a team, and then look for other friends to make another team, so that you can fight with others to get the score. Second, all you have to do is warm your body, if you don't warm it before the race you might hurt yourself. Third, all you can do is play for fun with your friends.
What is it the best? Public transport, our cars or natural transport as a bike.
My teacher said that public transport has not future in our society, because travelling by car is so much more adequate,nevertheless I disagree with her opinion because if we use public transport we will pollute less. 
 No one can deny the importance of travelling. Without travelling people would be very bored, life would be very monotones. So, in the future we will dispense of types of transportation. In these days, we use cars to travel between countries. Cars are very easy to use. People can't dispense of cars these days. Families can't dispense of cars. So we should know the right way to drive. We should be careful when we drive. We should be careful from careless drivers.
We have searched to find the model of 300 kw turbine on Parana, and we didn't find 300 Kw turbine in Parana. The Capacity of used wind turbines on Parana is 600 kw, 680 kw and 850 kw according to this site. We searched and found the 300 kw turbine is installed on Ra's Ghareb on Red Sea, not on Parana and Its model is Jordan NTK 300. Which capacity and model we will work on it ?
Nowadays people are using cars a lot. In the past, it wasn't like that, people had not had cars, they were only rely on public transport. They had no chose, because life was difficult, no money. There were no company cars. But now most people have cars. There are a few people are using public transport, like students and someone had low income.in my law, I can say might be the puplictransport going to e close because nobody is going to be close
Last week, my class and another one went to a school trip in Sicily. We visited many cities like Taormina, Syracuse, Argent, Marsala and Trapani, and we saw a lot of monuments of Greek history. We stayed in three different hotels and one day, we went also to the sea in Guarding NixOS. The best thing I saw was the Valley of the temples, because there were a lot of ancient temples and monuments and ruins, and they were really beautiful and also the panorama was amazing! That day, there was a great time, and it was sunny and hot; I took a lot of photos and I learned new particulars about these important buildings.
It was a fantastic trip and I hope to do similar trips like this!
People are interested in everything unknown, mysterious and incredible.
They are looking for new experiences.
Nowadays, a very popular topic among teenagers is existence of cosmic creatures.
To be honest, I don't believe in UFO.
On the world recorded a lot of cases where the UFO was seen.
Ufo story started already in antiquity.
On the walls of caves are sketches and paintings which show strange creatures and flying saucers.
Universe is colossal and still we are knowing little about it.
Maybe we don't be alone and UFO exist? 
in addition, more and more scientists agree with alien really exist
I am person that like going to do exercise, for this reason I like practice some sports, but the truth is that my favorite sport all around the world is the soccer. I believe that play soccer is an excellent activity, because in every game that the people can like always has to exist some rules. This kind of rules are very important, in my opinion, because when you do an activity and comply with the rules, you are being a better person.
He is a important person because he is a president of government in Spain. 
He is very ambitious and polite. He has been done several laws again Spanish citizens. 

Furthermore, he studied at University a Degree in Law. 
When Anna was president of government before he, he was like minister. 


 
I have played this sport for twelve years ago this sport has taught me to respect the other not assault to him. There is the only reason that makes me choose this sport is I don't want to be weak I wouldn't like to be nothing in this country that has a rule Strong dominated the weak. When I put my feet in the gym I forget everything school, home...therefore I enjoy it. I can't imagine my life without taekwondo it is my blood, my soul. Taekwondo it is not a violent sport as many people say but what you have to know is what in the brain and the heart of players. I just get the 1st degree international black belt and I would like to tell to anyone he's just starting this sport use your abilities and skills for the right things.
A story 

 This is my old brother's story. One day, my old brother went to the park where we often go to play tennis, he saw a boy who held a red hat cried on the branch, not knowing what to do, he stranded behind a big tree and looked at the boy.
 A few minutes ago, some boy who looks like elderly than my old brother closed to the poor little boy, the little boy stopped cried, he looked on some boy, my brother felt afraid because they look like rube, but he still wanted to help the little boy. Suddenly, a rube boy grabbed the little boy's clothes, the little boy was cried loudly, my brother was outrage, ran to the rube boy and attached him.
 The little boy more and more sadly, tears rolled down from his eyes, my brother pity him, he gave the little boy his smartphone and open a good music, the little boy stopped to cried and started to smile.
 Evening, the little boy's mother took him home, he told his mother that what happens today, his mother smiled to my brother, and took the little boy gone, my brother smiled and went home.

 
It was a sunny day like every day Sara woke up and had breakfast with her children then she went to her job. When she had arrived to her office, she had a phone call from the hospital. They told her that her brother had a car accident first she shocked 
Then she went quickly to the train station, and she bought ticket to London when she was in the train she had other phone cell. They told her that she has to bring $100,000, so they can do the surgery to her brother 


The woman`s name was Sara. She came from a poor family, and she lives with her children. Her husband was dead a long time ago.
In a car accident, when she her what happened to her brother she was so nervous then the miracle happened she found a big suitcase in the train she decided to open the bag because no one was in the train, so she opened the bag she surprised when she saw a lot of money inside the bag . 


However she took the half of the money because of her brother. After that, she went to the hospital 
and paid the money for her brother surgery. The surgery was successful.


 
Chichen Itza is one of the seven wonders of the world. It is located in Yucat¨¢n, Mexico.
It is very important as per this was a city and a very important ceremonial center. 
The Fukuoka tower is the must important part of this place. 
There are other areas like "El judge de pilot" this means the Ball Game, there is also a very important "Cenote" where they used to sacrificed pretty young girls to their goods.
 The restaurant I`m going to review is called Tints y Rubies and is located in downtown Montevideo. It is specialized in barbecue, beers and wines.
 The infrastructure of the place is quite wide and in the front side you can see a huge welcome sign. The restaurant has a rustic design, and it has outdoor tables. The service provided by the restaurant is exceptional, for example, the waiting time is very short. And it is very well-ordered. In terms of food quality the level is extraordinary, they are well known for their roast meat.
There will be a future for public transport.
Petrol will run out in a few years.
We can produce electricity by creating wind wheels and water wheels.
Trains are going to be used evermore.
Public transport is going to be used more than ever.
There won't be enough space on the roads for cars one day. 
There is a hotly debated issue of that whether a student should take at least one year to work or travel before they go to university. And the topic of people's view can be approached from different angles due to its complexity. Some people prefer this "gap year" theory, while others seem to prefer to disagree. After careful considering this issue, I also develop my own points of view. I favor the former statement, that is, I think a student should have a gap year before they go to university, based on n1, n2.

Dear teacher,
I agree with you about the future for public transport.
I am sure that there is a good future for it. Every day, the combustible that we get to our cars is more expensive than use the public transport.
Nowadays, people use their cars to move for work, for holidays......but if the petroleum were cheaper, they could travel very much.
It could be a good idea if the taxes were cheaper than the taxes of other things such a tobacco, alcohol.... Thus, people could spend their free time travelling and having a good time.
What do you think about that?

Although traveling by car is fascinating but still using public transport has its advantages, by using public transport you're saving effort when driving a car for along distance you will get tired, some people don't have enough money to buy their own car.  
I saw you uploading the cat into the glass bottle on Facebook. I want to give you a few words. Maybe you just think it's fun,, but it's been a good cause for your cat because of you're joking. If you want to raise animals, you must take care of it love it and treat it like a family. Although it is not human, they also have feelings. You raise it once, it would regard you as the owner. You are only relying on it. I hope you will decide to cats, do not let it hurt in the future. Furthermore, your abuse cat has violated not only the ethics but also the law.
 I hope you can take down photos of being abused the cat, and you can really reflect. Don¡¯t repeat the same mistakes. To keep the cat is not a simple matter which need to real love and good care. So you decided to keep the cat must be the best, you can spend more time with the cat. At any time to pay attention to, the cat has not been sick. The holiday, you can go for a walk with a cat. It is not difficult to do the thing. As long as you are determined, you will be able to become a good master.


The diagrams below show the five stages about the process of making banknotes.
Design is the first stage, which contains three parts:background, artwork and security issues.
After preparing of metal plates by skilled machinists, it takes sheets of bank. There are three requirements for it:color on both sides, special ink and images slightly raised.
The most important step is Inspection :printed sheets manually inspected.

If you apply job like this must be the person who already been applied this job USA SUMMER CAMPS
Why should I take at this job?  Because, I really love to work with people all ages, and I would like to appreciate have this post, and I¡¯m energetic and hardworking person.


Therefore, to look after children aged 8-12 years old isn't easy task, but as a father or parent you must always give them good care in terms of your responsibilities. Working in the kitchens means to do all about, i.e. cleaning and washing the floors.

Beast regards 
There is no future for public transport, that is true, but I think that people are very comfortable and don't think about the environment. On the other hand, the public transport is the cheapest way to travel, although people don't think of that aspect. Secondly, you can drive your car everywhere, It doesn't matter what time it is or where you would like to go. Travelling by car is much more convenient and comfortable than travelling by bus, by subway or by train. In your car, you can put inside all bags that you want to take. These aspects or advantages are that I can say about this topic.
Hello.
My name is Anna, I am a very cheerful person and I have a creative personality, so I enjoy planning activities or organize sport events in a special and colorful way. I really love children's and take care of them, I also had an experience of working in summer camps and have a good experience doing delicious food because I already did this stuff in other camps. I think that I gave good reasons and I hope that you will accept me.
Goodbye, Anna.
Cell phone
I chose this invention that I think that helped to humanity to communicate more easily, 
Motorola It was the first doing something to a mobile phone was on 3 April 1973 the first to do so was an employee of Martin Cooper
Cooper made mobile phone history in April 1973 when he made the first ever call on a handheld mobile phone
After that, with the new technology they could invent new and better diapositives for the needs of users 

"taken from https://www.uswitch.com/mobiles/guides/history-of-mobile-phones/"
Dear diary
Today was a good day, not every day is as good as this was. It stared with that a woke up around seven a clock and i wasn¡ät tired at all. I walked out to the kitchen and saw my mother cooking breakfast for me. It smell terrific, and tested so good. It was pancakes and egg with bacon. After that, i polymer with my brothers out in the garden. They usually don¡ät wan to be with me but today we played all day long.  It was so funny and i couldn¡ät stop milling. The weather was Aldo good today, the sun was shining and there were no clouds in the sky.
 Extinct Technologies Inc. provides reliable technical supports to our valued customers. Technical support can be provided through emails, telephone calls, or video conferencing. Different levels of technical supports can be arranged and purchased at different prices.
My wife and I went to Usual for four days but at the second day we realized that my wife had forgotten her glasses, so we decided to come back. When we arrived, there were a lot of Mat¨ªas'friends in our house listening loudly music, playing games and drinking. We told them that had to leave our house immediately. When everyone was out, we told of Mat¨ªas because he organized a party without our permission. He told us that he was really embarrassed about what had happened and he apologized for her attitude
In my opinion, in future, people don't be used public transport. It will be not Trey because everybody will have his own car. These cars will be used in alternative energy, for example energy of the Sun. The modern science tries to find new, more economic sources by energy.
Do you have a best friend in your life? What the meaning of friend? Friend is people who will be there in your hard time and happy time, and friend is always encourage you all things you choose in your life. Friend is also be there when you're said and worse time. There is no ex'friend, so respect your friend, and they will more respect to you.

Secondly, the student have a good body shape can easily to make new friends, and joining a sports team allows students to maintain good body shape. For instances, the students joining the sports team needs to do some basic physical training to maintain their body shape. According, the boy or girl have strong muscles can let them look more attractive. Therefore, the student joining a sport team can maintain good body shape, and it will let student become easier to make new friends.
Peter looked at his watch and knew he had to do something immediately. It is said that when you survive to a situation which has made you be at the limit, you change. And you can never return to be the one you used to be. You are no more the person that people have expected. But you don't care about it. Every hard situation may be got over easily when you make a big effort.
Peter has been thinking about this secret party for months, since the time he knew his mother was healed. He was taking care of her so that he was prevented from going to university. He had to refuse to all his dreams suddenly. However, the destiny has given him another chance to follow them.
Despite his strange behavior, Peter's mum didn't expect it at all. She felt blessed as she was given such a perfect son. It is said to happen once in life.
Peter has been kissed by her mum before, but this time was quite different. Maybe he didn't notice it at all, but it was a farewell. Now Peter could fly on his own.
Environment is the combination of air, earth, water forest and all these are interlinked with each other. Most importantly, all species of animals and human being are the part of this ecosystem. Human is the most wise and intelligent from all of these. However, he is mainly responsible for disturbing this ecosystem with various activities.
 
Let's talk about one of them, that is 'cleanliness' Nowadays, we all know that we are spreading the garbage near our houses and offices. This may be due to people are not aware about consequences of this bad habit-spreading the rubbish. But, in these days, with education, people are becoming more sensible and responsible towards the environment.

In the same line, dwellers of my village are doing lots of work to make their area clean and hygiene. They collect household waste in a trash can and put off with proper standard procedure. They collect and segregate the rubbish in separate containers. For example, they collect plastic waste in yellow trash can while, liquid and solid, degradable waste in red container. This makes easy and convenient to identify the waste types.

To conclude, I would like to say that nowadays people are becoming more aware and conscious towards environment through education.  
Today in my class there was a discussion on television education.
Television is an object that help people to know the news in real time.
There are advantages and disadvantages; television can also cause a dependence, cartoons and "stupid" program can damage mostly young people.
Today there are many children that have the dependence on television, they prefer to stay at home to watch the various child TV programs, while once our parents preferred to hang out with your friends.
Television can be a useful student if it is used with caution, accordingly, I recommend use less of it to prevent damage to the mental level.
I am concerned about pollution. This issue has become a big problem to solve. In order to help reduce contamination I take action from the three "R".reduce, reuse and recycle as, so I am more and more eco-friendly.
I reduce use of unnecessary power at home, in other words, I turn on light that I need for the while I use it;I take less warm shower; I hit only necessary rooms.
In order to reuse, I convert all thing reusable, for example, plastic bottle as a plant pot; glass bottle as a food container;I bring my reusable shopping bag and refuse to use a shopping plastic if a salesmen offer me to bring.
Recycling is another way to be an ecologist. Today, we have more item to recycle as long as we clean properly and put in a proper bin, which will be use it by specialized factory in another item.
As long as I try to keep doing thing on an eco-friendly way, I realize that I am give a little from my side and I feel careful of my environment.
Hello!! How are you!!
I am going to Spain to visit my grandparents. Then I am going to Paris to look forward to to my aunt. Next I am going to Italy to see the PAPA. If you want, I am going to Barcelona to go with you.
See you soon!!
PD:we have to meet

Hi Jo,

In my opinion, it is a good idea about you spend some time travelling because you will have an opportunity to think about your future but in my city because of the crisis there is very little work for everyone.

Here, there are monuments, churches or famous people and perhaps to you in the future you would like to become a history teacher. Although now that the holidays are coming you need people to help and ride the amusement park or the lights of the fair. If you come to Linares could amuse you and if you come forward to work can do it
 
You have to come here because Holy Week in Linear is nice, and the show is spectacular and if you want to have fun and I like the bulls 

I hope to see you soon

Sonia
Hi Sara,
It was great to hear from you.It¡äs a very difficult decision for me too. But if you want to decide, I¡äll intend to help you. On the one hand, you need a sport to keep fit. On the other hand, music is the best for relaxing and enjoy. Well, I think you shouldn¡ät give up either. You can devote more time to do both. If I were you, I would go running in the morning and I would go to music classes after lunch. So, you can do both. I hope this help you, and you will take the best decision. 
Lots of love
Fire
I agree this affirmation because the public transport is more expensive than car, is slow and is less economic.
The car is less expensive, more comfortable, more fast and more security.
Every time, the car is more utilized and more economic.
In my opinion the car, more advantageous than car and the car is more useful
To my mind, this mind not right.
First travelling by car is very expensive. For example, travelling by train is cheaper and travelling by plane is phaser.
Secondly, it's not comfortable.because you every day drives instead of relaxing and enjoy the environment
Using public transport has certain advantages and also, disadvantages. It is said that people prefer going by bus to a close place, but some then don¡ät think the same. 

The public transport has plenty of advantages. Some people can¡ät afford to buy a car or to pay for oil, as it is constantly rising, so using public transport is an economical way to travel. On the other hand, it helps to reduce the solution made by cars,. Besides, it will be always useful for people can¡ät drive.

Many people admit that if they could buy a car, they would do it. The reason is they are tired of using public transport, and they would get earlier to everywhere. In the future, cars would be so cheap that everyone will have one, thus, it will take up the end of the public transport.

To sum up, I would say that people will use more and more public transport, as the oil is getting expensive.


The picture illustrate the progress of making notes. There includes some most important steps.
Design is the first and the most important process.
It is the first step that costs troublesome, some things must be included in the considerations, such as background color, artwork, security issues.
Then, preparation of mental plates and skilled machinists are the elements. Printing is the next step, Usually, sheets of banknotes printed, because there are some specials require for the printing, so lour of both sides, special ink, images slightly raised.
The last step is the inspection, sheete manually inspected.  The inspection always have three results, the good quality sheets, the bed sheet or the partially damaged sheets. If the print sheets have good quality, they will packing and distribution. Some partially damaged will cut into separate or packed or dispatched. The bed sheets will disposal, the destroyed will be secure.

My favorite sport is swimming. I go swimming since 1998, when I been ten years old. I like swimming because I feel a good sensation and my health is good. Actually I not practice because I am not time, But a feel miss! Now I go to the gym and practice weight lifting three Times A week, Exercises aerobics every day and yoga two times a week! If every feel very well after come back to the gym. Often I go to the gym with my friend, Vanessa, But when she can't go I go Alone. I always go! My cough is very friendly and help me


 The television is one of the most important AV media in the world. You can use it for many purposes, according to your needs. There are a lot of channels in many roles, for instance, education, movies, songs, sports, news and so on. The television is not only for entertainment but also for education. The television can entertain you through it's entertained channels, and the television can educate you through its educational channels.
Nowadays, the space for countries enlarges, instead of which, the area for farmland, forests and wetland is getting smaller. This kind of situation brings all kinds of problems to mankind and animals.
The large-scale building projects took the space which should belong to the animals. The food for them and their living space might not be enough. Some kinds of animals would move to the urban area, steal the food from us and sleep on the streets or in the underground. However, most of them might be arrested .only a little number of them might be adopted by those friendly human.
On the other hand, the expansion of city increase pollution of all kinds of garbage. The air pollution is much more serious now, and watching the blue sky is almost impossible in some big cities. Although the medical skills get stronger, the percentage of people who get cancer is still improving.
In conclusion, the large-scale building projects take the living resource from animals, increase the possibility of getting cancer and so on. Only if the government develop more technical property, pay more attention to the environment protection, such as build more trees and grass in the cities, and set a special low for those missed animals will help decrease the harm that the building project brings to us.
For me , my family members are not my best friends,, although I wish they are. If they are your best fiends, they will guide you and help you to be the best of you, they won't hurt you or turn their back on you. But on the other hand, you maybe punished, or they may yell at you when you do something wrong. So it is not always a good thing, unless they are open-minded or have their own methods to punish you in a gentile way that won't make you regret telling them your faults or mistakes. 
Dear Sir/Madam,

I am writing to apply to a job for summer camp.
My name is Jenny Wang and I would be the right person for the job.

About me, I was born in 1989, and I live in Los Angeles since 2000.
I came from a large family and I have two younger sisters with age of 10 and 12.
To introduce my skills, I passed all exams in English at school and I can speak English well.
I also have experience with teenagers through my sisters, and I will look after them as I take care of my sisters.
Additionally, I am a hard worker and an active person.
Regarding the work conditions, thank you for providing meals and accommodation and I are willing to take the costs of the flight.

Finally, I am the right person for the job and I will do my best if I could have to chance to work for summer camp 2014.

Thank you very much for your time, and I look forward to having positive news from you.

Yours Sincerely,

Jenny Wang
First, I wanted to say sorry about a boring life. Sometimes I felt lonely, that I meant.
You knew everything about my health. I've never hidden this information from you.  From first time I said about that to you, I had a problem with my health, but you answered: it not matters.
I felt so bad in a car. I felt that I could lose my consciousness, that's why I removed a bracket. Furthermore, I really don't feel my blame. Furthermore, I talk about everything.
Hello Lara.
I am gland to hear from you. 
I am 24 years old I am from Lviv, Ukraine. My hobbies are football and gym. I have got 1 brother, Peter. I am a PhD student in university. Furthermore, I am studying envaermantal saints.
Evgeny.
Welcome in this town. We are here to introduce the shopping facilities and shops in this town to you. Washing you enjoy it. 
       There are several big plazas in the center of the town. You can walk about ten minutes from the station or by bus to there. There are shops, restaurants and cinemas in these plazas, including some well-known brands. You may be energetic or crazy by these charming shops where you are walking around. If you feel like to eat something, there are a lot of well-known restaurants, and have different country meals. You can choose the taste you like. After a long day of shopping, you might have spent all the money. There's a bank in each plaza. So, you can enjoy your time without money's problem. At night, there's another side to this town. You can see all the streets are adorned by lighting. This is one of the sort of the best quality here. You might have a walk around after supper. 
my father 
my father name is Career art. He is very loving and caring. They give us all the facilities one should have and dream of these things. He provides all the facilities to us of internet and books so that we can learn better and can be good students and get good marks in the examination. He always encouraged us and said don't afraid of anything because you are braver than anything else.my brothers and me proud of my father. He is very hardworking and brave. He has the smiley face. He always tries to laugh other people with their jokes. He always listens to us what we want. He never ever ignores us.
Dear friend,

Many thanks for your letter and your assessment for my invitation. I am so happy you have finally decided to visit my country.

Listen, do I tell you about getting to my apartment. There are several types of transport in my town. But you came flying early morning, the most convenient and fast transport is taxied that doesn't cost expensive to my house.

In the spring, there is mild weather, approximately 20-25 degrees. There are possibilities of raining. So you can bring light and waterproof clothes.


I'd better stop now and make ready for your visit. I hope you'll enjoy my country. Give my love to your family. Please write me a line soon. I'm looking forward to seeing you in April!

All the best
Mari
Hello Sam.

Thank you very much to write me this letter. Now, in order to answer your question, I have many favorite places near my town because I live in a lovely and little town, but there is one place that is special for me: `A Fervent to Federal¡ä. `A fervent do federal¡ä is located in my town, Domino, in Spain. It is a very quiet place, because of its location, in the middle of the forest, only a few people know how to get there. You can only arrive at `A Fervent¡ä walking or riding a bike, but it is impossible to get there by other ways. It is an incredible forest place, the ground is full of low grass and there is a little river where you can swim, is the perfect place to have a quiet day.

That is all I can tell you about this place. I hope path my answer will help you with your project.

Greetings, Xavier Morales.
What is your last name? Do you mean surname? Yes. My surname is Back.
Are you married? No. I'm single. A pretty girl like you is still single.
Stop it. I am single for a while.
My favorite sport is volleyball. It's since I had six years hold that I try this sport. I say to people that want day this sport that it's easy if you love it. You are an advantage if you start when you are young. This sport can help your health and everyone can learn to do volleyball. In Italy, volleyball is very common, specially in my region. If you try this sport in the wrong way you can have health problem, for example you can have problems at hands, at the need and at legs.
Hi Lara,
My name is Jose. I¡äm 25e years old and I¡äm from Madrid, Spain. My hobbies arguing out and travelling around the world. I love the music like you, and my favorite group is U2. Do you like it? I¡äm only child, and I¡äm studying Marketing in the morning and working in the evening in a mall. Do you like studying Laws? 

I hope your news soon.
Jose
Hello my name is Sophie Nielsen, I was born 2002 in Sweden, and I am still living here. I got one sister that named Ingrid, and she is 8 years old.  

On my spare time, I like to hang out with friends and play soccer. I also do homework but it¡äs not I do because I like it.

The accomplishment I am the proudest of was when I did four goals in a soccer game. 
The best places I had visit is my house in Spain. 
 I like to eliminate that I don¡ät read so much, because it¡äs easier to learn things if you read.

Three words that I can describe myself with is :
1. funny 
2. kind
3. awesome 


I think people will be surprised to know that I was born 2002 and not 2001, but I was born first October so it¡äs not so much difference.

My favorite song is All about that bass with Meghan Trainer, because the song makes me feel good and happy 

My favorite movie is The fault in our stars, because it¡äs very good, and I really like the characters and the story.


Emily knew she would have to come to a decision son. Two months waiting for an answer was too much time. 
it was a cold night when her boyfriend asked her to get married. They were spending the weekend in the countryside, he had rented a Woodhouse, but he hadn't confirmed the weather, and a strong blizzard arrived giving them without communication by pone or by car.
The problem for Emily was that his boyfriend was as cold as the weather. She thought he was so bored, but she didn't want to be alone. She didn't know how to live on the own, and Emily was utterly frightened to be alone.

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this report is that people would become more aware of the significance of taking care of the environment in order to eradicate this issue which is having serious consequence nowadays. Acid rains or global warming are issues which have been brought about the careless people.
ADVANTAGES
By one hand, if we avoid being the pollution in ours cities, we could have a lifestyle healthier than in the past. 
On the other hand, we help to improve and clear up the environment if we throw away the rubbish in the green points of the town.
MEASURES IN Favor OF TAKING CARE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
The council is carrying out a project in order to eradicate the rubbish in my town. This project is focused on separating the rubbish in each green points of the city, and also they have to maintain their neighborhood as clear as are possible.
CONCLUSION
To sum up, taking care about the environment should be an obligated task for us. The main reason for this is, provided that we bear in our minds that we must collaborate with all around, we will maintain the world on our hands.

Dear USA Summer camp

I reply to your advertisement for work with children this summer in summer camps, have looked after children aged 5-10, and it was a fantastic experience, worked at school in North Africa like a volunteer and learned a lot about children, think that I'm a suitable person for the job because use to be an energetic and cheerful person and very hardworking, love working with children and like organizing several types of activities, I'm not very good cooking but I can learn very fast. Think that can do a fantastic job.

I would be grateful if you could send me further details about this job.

Mar¨ªa del Mar


To combat the distraction of environment, this is a serious problem throughout the world. Nowadays, many trees and grasses are damaged in many countries, lots of building are constricted. And people should pay attention to this problem and try to love it. 
There are denying that the environment are changed by behavior of people and animals. For instance, people need to many places to build the modern society, so they fall down lots of trees, burnning many glasses. Another factor that the animals are not control themselves to eat the plaints lend to distraction of ecosystem.
Nowadays, the transportation become more prefect, and the people'life become more convenient. Althought this change lend the life of people efficient, the problem should not be ignored. It would really be helpful if the government make tighter restrictions, in today's world, lots of constriction companies and factories are not admission, they are destroyed the forest, farmland and wetland, charging waster water and emitting greenhouse gas, it leads to a serious environment problem. So the government should oversee this companies, and if companies do not obey the rules or laws, it will be fined and closed.
Second, the government should publicize the awareness of protection 
Taking the train is more cost-effective than taking a car to work as petrol is costly, and the new transportation office has reduced the cost of tickets to assist with the daily living expenses we encounter. The other benefit if taking public transport is fewer people are taking cars, reducing the amount of toxic gases released into the environment.
Abortion is an immoral act that people make, as everyone has a chance to survive and nobody has the right to decide for anyone life. Abortion has to be taken seriously in order to avoid this immoral action as this fetus are being deprive of their right since they have already a life. People had to be sensitized about abortion in order to decrease the number of women being aborted. Furthermore, abortion is very dangerous and a great number of women had been death with this. Children has to be protected before and after life, it is why abortion has to be stopped
In my opinion, I believe the public transport will have big role in the future due several reasons:

1- Inflation in population, the roads will not bear or endure huge numbers of cars.
2- I think on the future and transport and roads will be more organizing more than these days.
3- In the future people will concern more about energy, so transport will be more useful.
4- Transport more economical from independent cars.
5- Many people can't drive like children and old people.
6- Not everyone has the ability to buy a car.

Cause all these reasons, I believe the transport will have big future. 
From 1st MTR to 2nd MTR the sales increased by $100. Then, from 2nd MTR to 3rd MTR the sales increased by $250. Next, from 3rd MTR to 4th MTR the sales remained steady in $850. The last sales of the last year was $850. From 1st MTR to 4th MTR the sales increased by $350.
Karate is one of the best sports I have ever enjoyed in my life. One of the reasons behind my passion for karate is that it's meaning of jamming the mind and the body. I have learned to get control of myself when someone teas me, and to be alert as well. Also, it helps to look always slim and put me away from the ghost of obesity as well. People who want to start doing karate have to be patient. They should emerge themselves in daily exercises as well as eat healthy meals to keep them active .for instance, it's advice to eat great amounts of fruits and fresh vegetables because they contain a lot of vitamins that the body needs to work properly.
My favorite sport are football baseball Formula One and Tennis.
I started to play football when I had four years.
My favorite team is Real Madrid and my favorite player is Cristiano Ronaldo. He arrives to Real Madrid 5 year ago, and he is the best player of the team. His best friends in the team are Sergio Ramos, Marcelo and Pepe.
Basketball is my second favorite sport. I watch two match at the weekend of the Spanish league or NBA.
I started to watch Formula One for my father, This is his favorite sport.
Tennis is the favorite sport of my brother. I played tennis with my brother, but he always won. I played tennis with my brother, but he always won. That is one of my favorite sports
Hi Elena

How is going? Thank you for your letter! What`s a big surprise, you are married. My congratulations. I got your beautiful postcard and your invite. I`m very pleased to your invite. Now I`m thinking about the present, what do you like?
I look forward to hearing from you. Bye, Sandra
Sports is very much beneficial for our health. I would like to play football because it's too much exciting game. In proportion to length, it takes only 90 minutes. Whenever I got the opportunity, I played football.
Driving car while listening to music is much more fun for most of the people, so maybe that's why mostly love to drive than taking public transport. In contrary, some guys hate getting caught in traffic jam so prefer public transport;some other reasons may be rising gas price, car crashes or hating driving!
As a result, I thought both driving and public transport have their roles, and we need to take each in the right situation.
I prefer to travel by train.
I have two reasons why I think so.
First, there are many kinds of types which train has.
For example, in our country, "Shinkansen" which means Barrett train is famous and very fast.
" Blue train" which has many beds in train, and we can sleep comfortably in train.
Thus, not only to ride but also to watch train is very interesting for me.
Second, travelling by train is safe and reasonable compared to plane.
Recently, although there are many LCC careers we can choose, it is still expensive to travel by plane.
Travelling by train is cheap and getting cricket is easy for us in our country.
And terrorism is scare also.
The plane which travel from Egypt to Russia was exposed by terrorist in last month.
Compared to plane, train is relatively safe because it can move only on the land.
These reasons are why I think traveling by train is favorable.
Hello Julia,
How are you?
What did you do yesterday?
I went to the cinema to watch a comedy with my friends yesterday, but I didn't like it because it was so boring.
I prefer another kind of films than comedy, but yesterday there weren't any good film at the cinema.
What kind of films do you like?
I like thriller and the action films because they have never been boring.
Do you prefer to watch films at home or go to the cinema?
I prefer to watch films at the cinema because there aren't any distractions or noises and the quality of films are better.

See you soon.
Erica 
Our earth is getting sick as days go by. For example, air, water and land pollution. There are several efforts that we can contribute in order to save the environment. We start little by little to help it.

First, I want to emphasize on reducing the usage of plastics. It's the basic things and a habit that we can start easily from our own. Plastics are non-biodegradable which degrade after 1000 years. Non-biodegradable plastics could actually pile up the landfill and cause the land use in our earth to be occupied. Besides, it destroys the marine ecosystem in such a way that the seabird or fish are fed on plastic. This cause their reproduction system to be destroyed. Hence, we should bring our own recycle bag or basket every time we go for shopping and resist temptation to get plastic from them.

Besides, we should use public transport or carpool in order to reduce the CO2 emission into the environment. If the distance to destination is short, we could replace driving by walking or cycling. That's the decent was in reducing the adverse environmental impact, and we are able to protect our Earth
Since GM crops technology started to be implemented, it have implied in favorable socioeconomic changes. This technique makes the weed control easier resulting in cost savings and yield gains, so that increase global production of crops such as corn, cotton, canola and soybeans.
He said kindly:"I buy you a present, open it, Tom"
Tom opened the big bag, Oh! This is a big surprise, there was a football in it, which he always wanted to buy
there were some words' goal!keep doing! Keep looking!said her mom, Look! 
there was also a cup in it, It said"don't give up your dream, keep doing!go!we stand by you!come on" 
Tom love it, "thanks mom, thanks dad!" Today is the best day of my life, thank you!"
"You deserve them, Tom! You work hard all the time this year"
My name is Anna, i one of many new students at Ton Due Than university. I'm nineteen years old and from city but I living at dormitory at Ton Due Than university. It has 58 students: 18 boys and 40 girls. I love Ton Due Than university so much. I like the friendly students and helpful teachers. Furthermore, I enjoy reading book, cooking, playing with dog and singing. Moreover, I'm loves music, I'm often listened to pop music, R and B, and little Rap. My favorite singer is Adam Live.
These days people care about privacy and hence a personal car not only provides privacy but also convenience. Hence, the new luxury cars are getting cheaper and powerful. The speed of life has been fastened, people don't have time to wait for a taxi or in the bus stop to get their work done, they want their work done in the blink of an eye. So the need for bus has become unnecessary, and our own cars are simply time-consuming. Everyone has a car. Even kids started to learn driving at fifteen, and most of the parents gift cars in their sixteenth birthday. We can see to determine the future of transportation by differentiating the numbers of cars and buses. Students have started to use their own cars than the bus. So I think the future of public transportation is in darkness. 
My favorite sport is cricket. Cricket has become a part of me since when I was a kid. Its very interesting sport. Cricket brings a passion on me whenever and wherever its possible, I find out a way to start the game. I also watch cricket patiently. Its known as the gentleman's game. The best part of this game is batting, whether someone knows or not he first prefers to bat. Batting has its own cherish. So, I also prefer to bat and hitting hard rather than bowling. Its very simple and wonderful sport. If you play cricket, you are surely going to burn many bad calories adhered inside your body. In India, cricket is worshiped and players are the lord. The best part of this game is you can play with every age group at a single time. I was very interested in making my career through this, but due to my studies I can't take effort toward this.
So, if are going to play this sport, do notice that there are some rules and be sure that you have all safety stuffs with you. Please don't forget to take the pleasure of batting first.
I hope you are going to play the best game on your part.
Next Monday, I am going to India. I love India so much. MY friend was travelling there, she was talking to me about it so much. Indian people make an amazing food, but it's so spicy. Indian people dance in amazing way. India is the seventh-biggest country in the world by area. In India, it rains from June to September. One day it was my dream to go there. I am going to visit Delhi and Yamaha.
Hi Paul!
I¡äm writing to you to tell you that I will go to your home next month, I hope that you stay at home because I need your help, I will buy a present for Mary and I do not know what is her favorite color, Will you help me?
What is your favorite food? When I will stay with you, I would like to go to a Spanish restaurant, Will you?
You are my best friend since 1984, When I was born near to your house. Now I have lived in Badajoz for ten years, We moved here to go to the beach every day, I like the beach and the sun, especially in summer When the sun is in the sky. I like to dance and sing too, I¡äm very happy singing in the beach, especially if you stay with me.
I hope to hear from you soon.
Regards,
Kate 
Yes, I think it also can educate. As times go by, technology is rapidly improving. More and more gadgets are invented such as televisions, smartphones and so on. There are lots of pros if we watch the television properly. Using will not only gain the entertainment but also get the knowledge. For instance, there are numerous programs that we can choose. It is a good time to turn to the entertaining program, when we feel bored and gaze the wall all the day. Television provides educated varieties of channels as well.Discovery Channel is a posture-oriented model example to educate. We can learn how do the different animals feed on themselves. Above the statements can ensure a rich and abundant life.
I think after 50 years, many things will change. We will learn in our homes. We won,t have schools. We will do home works at home and send it to the teachers. They will correct our tasks and send it again to us. I think that we will order all we need on the internet. There won¡¯t be supermarkets. It won¡¯t be a post office because we can send anything by the Internet. All jobs will be on Internet. Every person will have a plane. We will go to any place by plane. We will have a robot servant. They will serve us instead of human servant. There will be any poor in the streets. We will live happily. I hope that the future will live peacefully and happily.

 Hi, I am Amy. I would like to spend two months studying in English, two months doing volunteering in children charity and the least two months travelling in UK. What do you think of my plan? I will not only improve my English skills but also devote myself to get along with children. The most important of all, I will take an adventure to the unknown place in UK. I am looking forward to seeing you soon. I would like to invite you to join the road trip with me.it must be an amazing experience if we are together for this trip. As long as you can go with me, just let me know. 
your friend Amy
My favorite sport is running. I usually run in the morning, when my roommates are still sleeping, I get up and run in the playground. I enjoy running, fresh air, warm sun and slight wind. When I am running, all pressure I undertook has gone. I am full with hope. I started running because I endured neck pain and my left leg is not comfortable when I sat all day. Furthermore, I want to reduce my weight as well. I bought shoes, clothes and GPS watch, I told myself:now it is a challenge, I must defeat myself. The first day is so painful, I was tired to die when I just ran nearly 3?km, but things becomes better and better, and now I could run 10?km.
 If you want to start running, firstly, you need a comfortable shoes and clothes, and secondly, make a plan, like how long should I run today, remember, appropriate rest is necessary. Don't make a goal that you can't reach, or you will lose your confidence soon. The most important thing is your willpower.
 First I will ask a question to you if this is your own house, you buy it with a lot of money and will you break it with no reason? Of course, the answer is no! Everyone knows that "Earth is our home." It is bigger than a house. We have Either first than people than our house. Eather is our home, we all have to protect it. But now people are destroy it. Just for many for more house but if we destroy it we will all die our money will go our house will go we will have nothing. Beside some people destroy farmland to build houses but if one day there is no farmland than what should we eat? Nothing at that time we can eat nothing! So what should we do? Forest brings us fresh air but if there are no trees, what will happen? We can't brave we will die, too!
 So my idea is AII the countries all the people stop to use farmland, forest indwelling to build houses grow more trees protect our world, our home star!
The lecture disagree with the paragraph, suggesting that the mention test developed by Alan Turing do not respond the main question: Can the computer think?
First, the lecturer talks about ¡°Saran¡± that propose a challenge to prove that the Turing¡¯s test was not conclusive, than he creates a paradox. He selected people to into in a Chinese room, there was a computer in Chinese language with different symbols, the American was a different behavior, they did not understand what was in the computer screen. Different from the original test mention on the text, that all the participants were American and native speakers from that language, it was really easy to understand what was in the computer screen.
Second, the text support that the computers were evaluated by the own people that submitted the test.

Not everyone can buy a car. For many, there are other important expenses that need to be covered. For example, for the young people in College the studies are more important, as well as books, seminars, travelling, etc. 
Nowadays, Public Transport has become a very important way to go to work, to travel to other cities, or to simply go to visit a friend to the other side of the city. 
I agree, for many people travelling by car is much more convenient, however, in my opinion, there is still a long future for public transport.  
Dear Ronnie
I am happy to know about you. Your plan sound great, and I will be pleased to spend a few days with you and your family.
My grandmother is going to visit me in July,, so I would prefer to suit you in August. My smaller sister wants to go to the beach, so that if she is not a problem she could come with us. However, she can stay at home.
I think it is more fun to sleep together in your apartment. We could tell terror stories to each other at night, before sleep. Maybe my sister could sleep in the studio.
I really like to spend time on the beach, but there are a lot of time, so we could go to the swimming-pool if your parents say yes. Too, we could go to the bar to drink some juice or to go to eat an ice-cream.
Do not forget to write soon
 Science, I just remember I always liked a car race, but one of my favorite is a Formula 1. I like cars, and I like high speed, that is why I love a Formula 1 races. Formula 1 season starts at early spring and ends with a late autumn. I try to watch every race every four night and training a day before the race. I like so much Rick Raikkonen, he is a Ferrari team driver. Rick, is not the fasts driver on the track, but he drives very safety. Ferrari making one of the fasts cars in the word, but this season they are not so fast on the Formula 1 track, how they were in the past. If someone like cars then should go to Formula 1 race to hear the solid engine sound, I think that is the best voice which I have ever heard in my life. Formula 1 it is also dangerous sport, the driver are exposed to the risk of accident at high speed. I wish Good lack to all Formula driver!
Michael is one of the most important economists in the world, he wrote a lot of books about economy and finance in the USA and Europe. He has decided to do a short essay about capital market abuse, whereby he considered to travel to Italy and pick up some financial data from Italian central bank. The key idea of this essay is the following: Italy in time of Berlusconi was almost entered bankruptcy, however Michael is trying to avoid the Italian economy condition simply because he likes Berlusconi too much. 
he received a lot of critics simply because many economists and econometricians in the world do not trust the source that he was used in his essay moreover they thought that he received money from Italian government. After two years that his essay was released, he will understand that his essay was wrong moreover, Michael will want to apologize to many people who read his essay thereby Michael now goes home, takes a cup of tea, goes to bed thus Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake 
It is very easy to spend hours getting entertained by television. However, it is more difficult to educate. It depends on how the presenter delivers the topic. I have learned a lot from television. There are excellent examples of good quality television on the BBC. What's more, there are countries around the world that lack teachers to go to remote areas to teach, that rely on television to teach.
Mistake !! oh, no !! How could I do this mistake!! These were my first feeling when I did the mistake.

Like every one, I was a normal person learning & improving day by day, little by little from mistakes.
I am writing to suggest a few ways what our college can do for the environment.
Firstly, how can the college save energy? In order to reduce energy consumption should be made so that as much as possible lectures takes place in the daytime. This would reduce energy needed for the light sources.
Secondly, what sort of things can we recycle in the college? It would be a good idea to recycle paper, glass, metal and plastic. In order to improve the sorting, there should be a litter bin for each mentioned substances in classrooms, corridors and outside.
Furthermore, the student and tutors should be encouraged to use public transport, cycling or walking. 
Finally, all the student should be taught lectures about the environment.
I hope I find the answers to your question in my letter.
Yours sincerely
Civil Jureviciute
Seoul, in Korea, has many places to visit which places people want to visit.
I will introduce some good places to visit. Firstly, people who prefer youth culture, I recommend Honda.
Honda is most appropriate to feel free and vibrant local area in Seoul. There are a lot of club, pub and bar, caf¨¦, karaoke and has more facilities which you will be able to enjoy.
Honda has many kinds of places thus, but you will be concerned about drunk people when the late at night.
At the late night in Honda, lots of people drink with their friends and walk around on the street with in drunken condition themselves. So you need to be careful of that kind of people.

And then, let me tell you another place, 'Duke palace'. You can experience 19th century Korean imperial architecture and Korean traditional custom.
There was the place of the Chosen imperials queen. The palace is in the middle of the city, therefore, you may feel different mood between 19th century and this day. And also, there is a gift shop and caf¨¦.
I hope to enjoy your trip in Seoul till you left our century. Thank you for your reading.
MATHIAS:
Hello, how are you?
Have you ever been to climb mountains? That is incredible and amazing, do you like your school?your city?
My school is fine and I like better my country than yours, our teams are betters than you, England are the worst of football, Argentina rules.
England, don't have anything you are the worst and more horrible country in the universe.
goodbye


In conclusion, before read the article, I have never realized the importance of using drama in an English class. For sure, I will apply those strategies in my professional life, because drama gives to students the opportunity to not just learn something in the classroom, more than that, is the opportunity that they use their knowledge in the pedagogical and social life. 
With reference to recent advertisement about ¡®USA CAMPAIGN SUMMER¡¯, I would like to express my interest in the position for the job in the campaign.
 I am a hardworking person and a fun girl.
 I know to cook delicious meals.
Furthermore, I lived since two years in England and I speak English.
Recently, I had worked babysitting since one year in a school.
 I felt very happy with this job. I like to do activities with them also I feed them. 
I think, so I am the suitable candidate for this job, because I like the children and I have experience babysitting also I work very well making the food.



I will wait phone call you to discuss the possibility of arranging an interview.
The Wheel.
I choose the wheel because is the most useful invention ever because thanks to it the human works make easier by example a way to move heavy objects, compared to some of the fancy gadgets that we have today the wheel was invented at a relatively late point of human history, he the oldest known wheel found in an archaeological excavation is from Mesopotamia.

In China, the wheel was certainly present in 1200 BC, for earlier Chinese wheeled vehicles, 2000 BC.

The wheel was found in a settlement built on stilts over wetland, indicating that the settlement had some sort of link to dry land.


(Taken from http://www.ancient-origins.net/ancient-technology/revolutionary-invention-wheel-001713) 
I would like to visit is Germany. You can think `why this?¡ä It¡¯s very simply.
In the school I study German and I like the language. I think is a strong, maybe a bit hard to hear, but beautiful at the end.
My teacher told me some things about the country. Added to what I know, make it attractive.
To this, we have to join the food and drinks (who don¡¯t think this?). Except estrange cases, who don¡¯t like to prove the authentic German beer, or the Frankfurt sausages in the place where was invented? 
And the topic I like the most. The History. From Teutonic mythology to Hitler and the Second War of World. It's an amazing history with lots of heroes and cries. You can think anything,, but I think that is the better part of Germany.

 Family plays an important role in our lives. Family is the members that they never won't leave you alone, they give you love and happiness, they make your day! They are our best friends and family.
 First, friends are important for us, we want a friend that we can share our secrets and problems. But friends maybe in the future go away or hurt you! So you can't always base on them! For example, they need you until they find someone better than you, and in the end they go away. But family never let you go or family never go away from you!
 However, the family is near you since the day you were born until forever. The members follow you, and can be based on them. You can tell whatever you want to them. For example, if you are in a bad mood the first person that will come next to you, to make you smile is your mom or dad. Mom and dad spent their life to grow up their children, to feed them, to love them!
 In conclusion, Members of your family an important role in your life!
In the last years was improved the public transport system. In the last edition of PUR Plus occurred an important discussion about the next plan of cities. It presented a politician, an economist and two environmentalists. They were talking about the problems of the public transport system and the results of new habits in this sector. These people, those live in a city, do not take her own car or have not one. This is a new age, which we live. So will follow problems of these habits. This makes me ponder, weather is a future of the old public transport system or should make a new system. 

One argument of this topic, that more and more people live in cities. They're going to following some problems. One of these are the jams. Everybody own a car and nobody rent a car. The car sharing system isn't common. So will follow more jams, if we do not change our habits. The results, which will follow, will be the pollution of the environment. So we need a new system. There should be a ban on cars. So we will stop the jam and so the problems of environmental. But now we need more buses or another faster public transport systems. But we should not forget, that these options do not alloy the environment.


Introduction
	Have you drank under the legal drinking age in this past month? If yes, then you are one of the other 8.7 billion who have also drank under the legal drinking age. You may think that drinking underage will not do too much harm, but it can. Teens should not drink under the legal drinking age because the teen could get into trouble with the law, the teen could cause harm to themselves and others and can have a higher risk of alcohol dependency later in their lives. 
Transport in Sudan is so expensive, we suffer from the less and expensive transport here . There are many kinds of transport such as buses train and small cars called am gad and also taxi 
This is an interested question because I believe that my family is my best friends, but at the same time they are not my friends.

My family is my best friends because they real takes care off me when I needed them to. They look over me and help me when I am in troubles. This is important because it is important to have somebody to rely on of.

But my family is not my best friends because you chose your friends, but you do not choose you family.

After all, family and friends are important.
The two maps show the changes which had taken place in the town of Ships mouth between 1995 and 2010.
Generally, it can be seen that the city became more modern in 2010 than it before.
first, in 1995 ships mouth was a green residential city with two forests. 
the two green area in the north-west and south-east concern had been replaced by apartment blocks and an airport.
No one can deny how much sport is very important to our life health. My favorite sport is squash. I start this sport since I was 10 years old. Where my father was playing this sport also, but he started it when he was greater than me, He was about 30 years old. Where squash is one of the games that can be played in any age, I love this game because I find it making exercise to all the body in the same time, we are running in small place moving hands in stretched and different ways in the same time you are working your mind in the same time, so it needs caring and quick thinking, as much exercise you will find down the road. 
I think that anyone wants to start sport can play squash which gives stretched and healthy body, in the same time this sport can be played for a long time of period without caring about the age. Squash sport also can be played individually as two players together or in team of 4 players. Squash one of the very nice attractive sports
SWIMMING, THE BEST SPORT IN THE WORLD 

I have practiced swimming for 3 years, I am a good swimmer and I have competed in different tournament of swimming.

The swimming is my favorite sport because in this sport I train all my body, is very relaxing and is the best sport in the world.

My favorite swimmer is Michael Phelps because He was the best swimmer in the world and I hope that He returns to Olympic games at Rio de Janeiro in 2016.

I need practice for being the best swimmer in the world than Michael Phelps.

My favorite style is the butterfly and I always practice this style because I want to improve.

I want to compete in the United States in the most important tournament, in this competition participate the best swimmers of the world. Some swimmers are Michael Phelps, Ryan Locate, Peter Van de Hoogenband and others. 
Nowadays, it is easier to use the car instead of public transport.
Although public transport is cheap and more environmental, they are not so flexible or comfortable as the car.
Except for the big cities the public transport is not an easy way to move trout the city, that means that in the future even more people will stop using it.

In these diagrams below, the manufacturing process of banknotes is shown clearly. The first step, the banknotes should be designed considering some constructions, like background color, artwork and security issues, After it was prepared, skilled machinists would make preparation of metal plates in the second step. Then, sheets of banknotes would be printed by 50 banknotes per sheet, which have color imagines on both sides in special ink. After printing well, these sheets would be manually inspected closely. It was the most important step during the whole processing. And then, some sheets and good banknotes from damaged sheets which would be cut into and separated into equal ones and packed and despatched to where they are demanded. Another ones which were bad sheets and bad banknotes from damaged apparently, would be destroyed securely. This was the whole working process of the banknotes, and it was consisted of 7 steps.
The sport is one of the best forms to be healthy and make some exercise. You can play it with your friends and have a good time. The most healthy sports are swimming, playing basketball, playing football or running,, but I prefer to play tennis.

My favorite sport is playing tennis. I play it three times a week (on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays) in the club of too. I had been playing tennis from 2 years ago with two of my best friends. I enjoy playing tennis because it is a sport that requires skills, concentration and speed. I am not very good at all, but I like to play it with my friends and do matches on Saturdays.

For new tennis players I recommend knowing how to hold the racket, the position to hit the ball and how to put your feet. They will have to concentrate on the game and enjoy it.
 One evening, it was a blistering hot day that I still should attend, one of my friends, a wedding ceremony. I was dressed in a nice suit, going to this party. There were so many people talking to each other. I didn't want to chat with them first. Consequently, I drank the alcohol on the table, looking for, my friend, a bride. I wanted to know how beautiful the woman was. As soon as the bride appeared in front of us, most people kept silent abruptly.
 I glanced at the groom jealously. How lucky he could marry her. I maintain a good-looking face, keeping fit. It was ridiculous that I didn't have a girlfriend. I prefer having a nice, gorgeous girl live with me to living alone. However, I still didn't have a girlfriend. I was overwhelmed with grief. I could not stand looking at them, celebrating. Accordingly, I drifted to the party, going home alone. However, I was too dizzy to go straight so that I took a ride. I fell asleep immediately. The driver set me to a place where he knows. When I woke up, not doing know why I stayed in the police office.
Dear Mrs Kate Ashy,

I'm Patricia Ag¨¹ero, I have seen the advertisement for work in your caf¨¦, and I'm very interested, because I need to work to pay my study.

First I think that this job is perfect for me because I have travelled around the world and I know a lot of kinds of food, in fact in my last trip to Japan I learned to cook sushi. In addition, I love dealing with people, I'm very sociable.
On the other hand I'm used to working long hours, as a matter of fact in holidays I had worked in many restaurants.

I hope your answer soon.

Best wishes

Patricia
One day Micheal wanted to go out from his home, so he called his befriend a suggested going out together, his friend agreed, so Michael wore his closes, went out and closed the door but at this moment he knew he had made a mistake. He forgot the key inside the home ! What should he do ? Hw went to his father in the company and get to another copy of the house key. When he gets back to the home it was late and the meeting was canceled
It is very true. There is no future for public transport. But not so many people have a driver license. They have to use public transport. The public transport can connect people. You can meet every kind of people. It's some kind of socializing. The public transport is cheaper than the car.
Hello, my name is Victor, and I am going to talk to you about myself.
I know that I am a suitable person for this job, and I can say that nobody is better than me for this incredible job, because I have been travelled for all the world and in this experience, I have seen in the necessity on work to fianc¨¦ my journey, so the have dedicated to work on summer camps, and I have a lot of experience in this.
I have other qualities like, cooking like super chef or even better than that, I am the person more organized in this country, and I love to work with children because it is a form to teach everything you know to other people and help to improve like person.
Furthermore, I always do exercise, in the morning I like to running on the beach, in the evening I like to go to the gym and at night I love to swim in my own swimming pool.
So in conclusion, I think that if you contract you, you will get an excellent people and an excellent worker
I think it is true that the public transport there is not a future, because travelling by car is so much more comfortable.
In my opinion the public transport is more expensive, and it is less comfortable that the car, because the car is faster that the public transport. The public transport do stop more time that the car, this transport go direct to its destination. 
Today the people use the application "blah blah car". It is an application that the people use to save gas and money. I believe that the people in a future they will begin to travelling shared car more time, and they use less the public transport as the train, the bus, underground, etc.
The problem that I saw with this, It is that in the future will be more pollution, because there will be many cars. 
Online Learning
Positive things about the online learning are that you are more mobile with your smartphone and you don't have to carry so much paper with you, also you're on your own and in your own learning speed what makes it more specific on the user it selves. Maybe you're more comfortable on your Smartphone then with papers. Negative about the online learning are that you're not listening to much from ea real person and more from a Computer, if you don't have any listening things in the app you don't learn how to pronounce the words. In my personal opinions better to learn from teacher not only DAT you learn to pronounce the words correctly you also learn from a person what is in my opinion way better I think k we spend enough time on smartphones so i don't think it's the best if we use them to learn as well. For words I think it's perfect but all the grammar and talking I think you need a teacher. 
I love Grey's Anatomy, this is supposed to be a medical drama, but I am sure this show has been beloved because of the soap opera drama parts. Therefore, I would like to highly state that Grey's Anatomy is my favorite soap opera. The show seems difficult, the characters always have to face the situations which is uneasy to solve, but practically, this show is a soap opera in hospital. 
I used to think I never liked soap opera, because it was boring, out of date and unworthy to watch, but this was just prejudiced. My mother also like this show.
Today¡äs television is perfect. It shows you movies, news and the new products. The advertisements are a bit tricky because they know exactly when children watch, for example after School. And then they just show products specially for children. So at a Special time is a special advertisement for this age group. But it also shows the new products. Advertisement is important for the economy. 
Except some good movies, they also show a lot of rubbish. Or sometimes you see during the day horror movies which should not be. Who wants that their child sees this? Of course, you can make a child lock on the TV, but when you look hard enough for some you will find any. 
Every day they show the news. So you know what is going on in the world. I think they show it four times a day. 

I would say if you know how and when to use a TV it is good, but specially for young people who think it is a good entertainment to watch the whole day. The TV people know what to play that the children get addicted to the TV. 
  
Attitude about schools in Colombia and Australia.

The attitude of Colombians about the educations' system is disappointing in some areas and optimistic in others. In the same way, Australians have a different attitude about their education system. However, the attitude of the Colombian and Australian people is different in many ways.
In Colombian, some people have a high attitude about education, but there are some others that have a very low attitude. This is because in Colombia there are a lot of social-economic levels which make people to have a different and divided attitude toward education. Similarly, Australians have a different attitude about the education system. This is depending on the beliefs and the cultures of the people. This attitude is more based on the backgrounds of the people rather than the system itself.

Today I am very exciting because on Sunday I will go to Bangkok. I go with my older sister, daddy and mommy. We will have a good time there. I will eat Tokyo, my favorite dessert. We enjoy so much.
Nowadays, people usually use the car all the days, actually for most of the diary things; despite the fact that there is small amount of people that travel in public transport. The cars pollute big amounts of carbon dioxide, so that is the result of the gray skies of some cities like Madrid Beijing or New York are gray and this has to change.

Using the public transport is "healthier" than the car for the environment because inside the bus can travel twenty-three humans and is only one vehicle, however it would be twenty cars. Also people think that travel in cars is faster than in public transport and I agree with it because the bus or the underground is always stopping in the different stations, so in this way the car is better.

In my opinion, I will use the public transport, not always but more than the car, although you travel slower because I want to save our planet, that the rising generations can live in good conditions.

Dear Sir or Madam
Reference to your advertisement I would like to apply for the position to work in AMERICAN SUMMER CAMPS, I am John from the capital city of south state in India,
I worked in middle-aged school for about 2 years, where I had experience which will be suitable for the current position.
As I worked in restaurant kitchen as a part-time job, how I gathered knowledge of basic cooking methods, hope it may be helpful for now!  I believe that this job suitable for me ! 
herewith I enclose the current CV as you can see in the attachment!
I am interested in work new work environment, kindly reply 
thanking you! 
yours truly
John
Hi my friend!
How are you ? Thank you very much for your last letter. It is very nice that you remember me. Now I want to tell you about my summer work in local cinema. This is very cool experience for me. You should come to my city and will enjoy. 

All this started on July. I looked for everyday some summer work and I found excellent option. I needed money which I can spend during study semester. The first day was very nice. Everybody was friendly to me. They explained all services procedures. Second day was awful. I did not know what going on. My clients were very impolite. I could not cope with the responsibilities. But my good men tell me one important sentence. This job would be boring if every day would be nice. He comforted me. And now, I am happy. In work, I am confident in work. I have money and satisfaction. I know that you are like me. And I know that job is for you! Please come and work with me!

Best wishes to your brew Bartek !
Dear Paul
Last month I helped host a concert in Timi?oara. I was the boy behind the curtain, I dealt with the sound of the concert due to my experience in professional music equipment. I encountered during the concert small problems, but we have fixed very easy thanks to the team with whom I have worked. Pleasure to work at concerts is when I look in front of the stage and see different classes of people with different ages starting from the young and the elderly who forget all your worries and enjoy the same concert as if not and be separate. The experience is an unforgettable and I hope that I feel the same soon at the next concert.

Your friend Logan
When they were together, they knew that his history was about to finish. They could live with this fact. People surprised to know his relation was broken for so long. They seemed happy to share their life. Never nobody heard any discussion. They were always so friendly, and so kind...that was strange image that end, But that was the sad reality. Then had to decide with who would stay their cat. They met with the layer. They presented arguments to get the custody and the layer listened them very carefully to decide they cannot have the cat. The cat had to go to the animal residency, and they had to pay the expenses. The meeting ended. Michael closed the door and knew at the moment he had made a mistake
 Michael made a very bad mistake.... There are the worst mistake that he does in all your life.... Her mom would kill him!
 But first, I will tell you all the story since the beginning. 
 Michael was a boy very intelligent. He was the best student in her class.
 The boy had a mother. Mia, that was her name. 
 She always asks Michael to never disrespect when people are at the door and always be polite. Mia couldn't accept when some behave badly.
 And Michael said every time that he will never do that.
But, one day, Mia thinks that she could do a test. She would get dressed as an old woman. So she said to Michael that she would go shopping, and she would return soon. 
Then she put her cover of an old woman and took her way home. 
Getting there, she knocked on the door.... Michael opens the door and Mia ask if he has a cup of water to give him, and he says way he would give a cup of water to an old people.
At this moment, Mia took away her cover and Michael sad:
OMG! This is the most mistake I did in all my life! 
 
 
The building was initially planned as the Federal Legislative Palace during the regime of Porfirio D¨ªaz, because the society was governed and supported for the president. 
In later time, society feel the need for change about iniquities that pass in the country and the Mexican Revolution explores, the building is abandoned because the government and country don't have money for construction, to the point the building metal structure was used as weapons. 
After the revolution, construction will use for represented the win of revolution 


Almost every family have a car now. They use this car to travel, for shopping, to drive to work. It is so much more convenient. Only in the big city, people use public transport to will not be traffic. 
 My mother and my father had a fight to each other, they wanted not together.
 They even asked me, I wanted to go with whom, they grabbed my hands, wanted me go themselves, but I had no idea, because I love my mother and my father so much. I wanted we can live together forever, they took care of me, loved me, we lived in the same house, we had a happy family. I thought these things.
 Finally, I cried, because I couldn¡¯t decide a choice, my father and my mother saw I cry, decided not keep going, and they said sorry to each other and me.

Hi Peter! How are you? I'm happy for you! I agree with your parents, maybe you could spend your money with something you really need, and maybe you can buy computer games with the money you have left, or maybe you put aside money to buy something really important to you. If I were you, I wait to spend the money. Let me know what you decide. See you soon. 
When I was at university student, I wanted to swim well,, but I couldn't swim. Because I didn't have to swim in my life. So I decided to learn to swim for summer vacation. First, I registered a swimming pool, then I went back to the swimming pool every day in the early morning. After 6 months I could swim well until now. So I satisfied my decision at 13 years ago. Nowadays, I usually went back to the swimming pool in the weekend. Sometimes I got rid of my stress. I thought the swimming was the best of sports in my life because you can use your body muscle everything. So you could a loose weight and gained muscles. Some of my friends, they didn't want to show their body by someone. Because a lot of students didn't have exercise. We didn't have to enough time today. But I always said to my friends, "If you want to have fit body, you will register swimming pool." So many friends learned to swim.  
Dear Dana,

Thank you for sending the AA Report to us. The report was discussed at our meeting, and we wish to congratulate you on completing this audit and providing the details and evidence on improving the outcomes from students results in this year.?

One straight observation was the low number of students that have taken the math course. We wondered if some work need to be done to increase the student attendance in the math courses.


The diagram gives information about various stages in the process of making banknotes.

It is true that there are five stages in the whole process. We can see that the processes begin with design and end at packaging and distribution.

Looking at the information in more detail. Initially,banknote should be considered the design such as background color, artwork, and security issues. Then, the preparation of metal plates is next stage.banknote should be skilled and machinists. Thereafter, this stage is printing.worker should pay attention to color on both sides, special ink, and images slightly raised.

Subsequently, this step is most important.banknote should be inspected.banknotes separated into good and bad if you to get good quality sheets, the next stage is packaging and distribution.at this stage sheets should be cut into separate banknotes, packed,and dispatched. if you get bad sheets. The nest stage is disposal. Band sheets and banknotes securely destroyed.
The diagrams show banknotes how to make, there are four steps to make the banknotes.
First, the banknotes are designed by consider, thinking from background color, artwork,security issues. Then, the metal plates are prepared by skilled machinists. And then, the sheets are printed, operator should pay attention to the color on both sides, special ink, and images slightly raised.
Third, this is the most important step that printed sheets manually inspected,the sheets are classified in three areas. The number one called good quality sheets, they will be packed and dispatched. The next called partially damaged sees, and banknotes separated into good and bad, good sheets will be cutter into separate banknotes and packed, the bad one will be destroyed by fair. The number three called bed sheets, they will be securely destroyed.
This is a method of making banknotes, and the operated should pay attention to the printed sheets how to inspect.
These pictures obviously show us what detailed steps of the bank to produce paper money into the application.
Before the production, they should think about the cover, including background color, artwork and codes which make it different from the illegal ones, then put them into the printing machines to create them.
On the top of the steps is the inspection by hands, that is to say, they should be separated into well-qualified ones, which are to be cut into banknotes, and delivered to the banks and the bad ones which can't be utilized are fired definitely at the last stage.
In a word, the processing of making money to banks is very creative and serious, even rigid.
I know that we can post anything that we want, but not like this. Wake up world. Look at you. Rise your nose from your phone, and look at all these nice things that the life is giving us. Read a book or play football if that is what you like. We are architects of our own destruction. We have to live our life. You can¡¯t live only on Facebook. 
	YOLO! YOU ONLY LIVE ONCE!

I think public transport don't lost. For example, me, I don't have a car thus I usually use a train in my school. I think that is enough. If I go travel, I think a car is very useful. But Movement of long distance is very tire. Consequently, you can't fun travel. Children can't get a car license, thus children use Public transport. Of course, don't have a car license, people can't drive a car. Accordingly, I think need public transport. 
I think that members of our family can't be our best Friends, because maybe we do not have the same confidence that we have in our Friends.

For example, maybe you have a personal situation, that is very important to you, but you do not want your family to know about it, so you decide to tell your best friend, because you know she won't tell anybody.

I think it depends on the situation, on the other hand, your sister or brother, can be one of your best Friends, you can tell them important things, but ask them not to tell your parents.


I'm studying Business Administration, I think my major is so busy. But also when I'm working on a project which involves business, I feel rewarded. Actually I realize that busyness is not for the major, everybody knows TEC is very demanandant and if you want to be there you must work hard.

I'm dreaming to be a Business Administrator when I'll be older, firstly I want to work an sports company like UA, and then I may have a little variety on works. Finally, I hope to get my own business.
Tennis, tennis is not just a sport anyone can play, but its professional sport needs to more hard trainee and more time to be perfect in it, in first why I choose tennis?, seriously in 2003 this is my first time to watch the game on TV when I saw Roger Federer played I think he is the one that made me love this sport, due to its professional motion in playing the ball, from this time I was interested in this game and watching all championship, so more time, time and time it was my favorite sport.
My advice is being patient, be smart this sport not easy, but it's need more trainee, more time to be one of the greatest player in the game
MY BEST FRIEND

I met my best friend, Aisha,at a friend's in common party six years ago, when we were 25. 
While I was dancing she pushed my by accident, she didn't notice it, so I thought she was an arrogant person at first.
But, when our friend in common introduce her to me, I realized that she was a funny and nice person.

Aisha is a funny girl, she is always making jokes, and she really knows how to have fun. Her parties are always the best.
She loves dancing, and she is really a party animal.
She is also a good listener, she always knows what to say in a bad moment, and she is always there when a friend is in trouble.

Aisha is in his thirties. She's from Morocco, so she has Arabian features, for example, she isn't very tall, around 1.57 meters, she has long dark wavy hair and black explosives big eyes. She is tanned and has a slim complexion.










Dear Redaction,

I have just read, that you need reviews of soaps opera. I have one favorite soap opera. This is a 'Beverly Hills 90210'.
I love this film, because it shows teenagers life. And I like to see how they look like. I like their style and live. They learn at school, they have problems with each other, they fall in love, have parties. Most of all, I like Brenda, because she is a smart, beautiful person. And she wears the best clothes ever! I would like to be like she. I think that a lot of people can learn how to live, what to think, eat, wear from this soap opera.
My best friend is my sister. Although I have 5 members of my family, but just one from 5 is my real friend. She did a lot for me, my life
.
 In my opinion, that is not a logical statement which jibes with the fact. First, although travelling by car become more convenient, the growing population which cause personal vehicle is hard to manage. The traffic jam becomes more and more serious as far. 
   Such as Beijing, the metropolis in China, faces the salient bad traffic as such government had to encourage the citizen to go to work by public transport such as bus and subway. Apparently, this method has made a great contribution to the traffic in Beijing. 
   So, the public transport is playing an important role in our daily life, It shows an indispensable effects on the society work.
 Crayola 
Introduction
The aim of this report is to inform the committee about the attractions of this town. The report is based on the opinions and ranking of people and critics that have been visiting these places.
Town center
In the town center there are most attractions as well as one of the best bars in the region ¡°the Albastirca¡±.  Many visitors come to it,, but there are more attractions than only one bar. There is a giant park which maybe the visitors would be delighted to visit as it has animals, a carnival and a lake.
Pluses
What¡¯s more about the town is that it isn¡¯t lacking shopping facilities. It has a big mall that has been recently opened up, and it contains everything the visitors might need. On the other, the mall lacks a cinema or some restaurants as it has been recently opened.
Conclusions
To sum it up, I strongly suggest that the visitors stay as much as possible in this town as it has almost everything that a man needs.

Some people say there is no future for public transportation,, but I don't think so. People who believe it doesn't care about air pollution and traffic.
Lima is a small city where there is no more space for another car. Moreover, it is more appropriate to start constructing roads which were convenience for the majority.
First my favorite sport is fut boll and I like for many reasons for example while you are watching a match you¡äre going to feel exited and entertaining besides that full has the best football player than ever who is Leo mesh he's the best and he's able to awesome stuff when he¡äs playing.
Yesterday morning, a group of American tourist went to a bike ride for through the center of Buenos Aires City. One of them was intercepted by a man on a motorcycle, he seemed to have 28 year. The mas were armed, try to steal the backpack. But he not is fixed that the man was a camera in his head and hi action was filmed.
He was furious because the American don't understand what he would say. The tourist was surprised to see a gun, the robber forced the man in the street and then the tourist put to run. He was very lucky because the gunman returned to pick up his motorbike and keep his gun. The man run to where his friends and sought a police. They found a police near it and made the complaint, the group continued the bike ride and returned to their hotel totally scared. After two days and with the help of the filming, the gunman was captured and brought to justice. Now he was arrested and charged before a magistrate for the robbery, waiting for his sentence. The tourists return to his country very scared.
How can I start? Should I start with speaking about myself or about my country or about my family or about my life?
 It is hard for an eastern girl to do what she likes because of her society's traditions and customs.
Let's take me as an example, I am a 25 years old girl who is graduated from faculty of engineering and want to travel to Germany to complete my study, but I am not able to do this because my family will not allow me to travel alone. 
I am trying to change my family's opinion so that I can travel. College is the only place where I feel I am special, that is why I always like to there. 
How we treat the earth has a direct impact on ourselves. Today, because of our progress of industry, we produced so many environmental problems that hadn't appeared before. For examples, lack of purity water, shortage of electricity, climate change, natural source depletion,etc. The problems weren't so significant that we overlooked them, but now they become serious threats that we can't ignore. How can we solve these problems?  Just change your daily habits. 

There are so many questions. Who we are ? What do we do ? Why we make mistakes ? There is no clear answer,, but the sure thing is we are humans. As a nature of human, we would make mistakes.  But we shouldn't make the same mistakes. If you're wrong, I will fix you and if I am wrong, please fix me. Anyway, we would make mistakes, if we do the new challenges and new tasks. We have to fix it all again.
Introduction:

The aim of this report, is to show how does my town take care of the environment.

Home rubbish:

The mayor, in collaboration with Lipor, distributed leaflets with information on" How to deal with household rubbish ". Each leaflet explains how to separate the home rubbish. Instead of putting the rubbish in one trashcan, the families should separate it in three different groups - papers, glasses and plastics - and put it into the correct eco point. The company responsible for rubbish collection collects of the garbage, already separated by the families, and afterwards does the recycling.

How does the town treat the environment:

The City Hall is very concerned in keeping the area cleaned. In spite of the informative sessions about the environment, organized by the Mayor for all the residents, it also has lots of staff that cleans the streets, take care of the city gardens and collect the garbage.

Eco-friendly:

In conclusion, I would like to say that the city where I live maintained the city cleaned and attractive, for people that live there and for those who visit the city.



I do believe that the members of my family are my best friends for many reasons.first, we got the same education as we grew together we know each other. If I suffer from any problem, the first step I do is I try to go back to my lovely sister because deep inside I know she is the only member that can assist me. Secondly, if I need money I will come back to my brother or sister I ask them to borrow some money.

I think public transport has good prospect in the future according to following reasons. First, the trend of environmentally friendly has grown since the shortage awareness of fuel, taking public transport can decrease the air pollution by car, and more governments had built the public transport system including subway, buses etc. The transport in the city isn't inconvenient as years ago. The other is, travelling by car isn't convenient if you go to the famous resorts, most famous resorts lack of parking lots, travelers may spend hours to park. On the contrary, people who take the public transport can more enjoy the travel because they don't waste vitality on driving. To summarize, because the development of public transport is more and more complete, the advantage of travelling by car was placed by public transport gradually, the future of the public transport is bright.
My favorite sport is football. It gives me many a positive energy and fun.
I have played for 12 years.
I am not a professional player.
Furthermore, I play just for yourself
Sometimes If I would like to play football, but it rains I can watch football on television.
If I play with my best friends at football, I will be a goalkeeper. 
In football my favorite position is goalkeeper.
It is really hard to give some advice. We have to be very patient. 
My advice is only one. 
If you practice you will achieve skills.
In Somalia, people usually throw the rubbish and garbage in everywhere, and there is no a cycle which intended to keep it.

The city council are tackling with how they can keep the city clean, and each and every morning there are employees whose work are to collect and keep the environment clean.
Many of the main roads of Mogadishu are getting attractive by the day and the people begun to make their city clean.
 
Swimming is my favorite sport, I usually swim 2 or 3 time a week, swimming is a good sport especially in summer. Study says the cool water will cool the body temperature down and that means it will burn the body fat fast then the other sport. The other advantage of the swim is the less impact to the knee. Swimming will be the good exercise to the people who are not able to jog or even walk. By the way, some people don't like to swim because they have difficulty finding the swimming pool, I think that just an excuse to be lazy, the Internet will help you find out.Let's go to swim.  

FOOTBALL_MY FAVORITE SPORT
Nowadays, there are many choices to spend in our free time such as go shopping, travelling, listen to music, reading, etc. But to me, I choose playing sport in my free time. 
Football-the most popular sport in the world, is well-known as ¡°King Sport¡±. There are two teams and each team has the same amount of players: maybe 6, maybe 7 and maximum 11. The objective of the game is to score by kicking the ball into the opposing goal. Actually, I began to play football when I was 10 years old. I play football in my free time until now. 
There are many reasons why I enjoy football. My first idea, football make us stay in shape, avoid some diseases. A second idea, It helps us make new friends when I take part in some football team. I have relationship with people who are playing football with me. They not only help me in every match, but also share me everything in daily life. A final idea, football makes us enjoy our life and increase quality of life so far after working hours.


Eating a balanced diet is something very important for anyone, especially for pregnant women, children and old people as their bodies need more nutrition than younger people. Although balanced diet will offer energy and vitality, but that's not all the thing, Exercising is important too in addition to the balanced diet.  

My favorite sport is football I love it so much when I was young I used to watch football and my favorite team is Barcelona I was play with my friends at the street, and we are happy with that so much and after that we played at playground like really football I love Cristiano Ronaldo so much he is the best player at the world a few people telling me that Messi is the best player but I feel angry when I hear that because that is not true so I looking forward to meeting my best player one day its like a dream to me.  

I think the alcohol is the most dangerous addiction all around the world. Because many people have died for this, and it's really hard to stop this addiction even if the person wants to stop it.

My favorite sport is swimming
I swim 2 times per a week
sometimes I go to the swimming pool in the same area which I work there and sometimes I go to the swimming pool of my cousin,
I enjoy when I spend my time in the water and now even I am pregnant I am afraid when I swim with a group of people I keep telling them and screaming do not close with me !!!HHH sometimes is funny
but my husband he takes cars of me he doesn't allow to anyone to be much closer with me,
my mother-in-law she likes swimming too 
last night we went to the swimming pool it was a little cold, but we liked, so we went to the pool and stated to swimming I know how to swim very well, but she doesn't she has to have a support otherwise she can't.
 
To: Emma Brown...........co.update: Thu Nov 26, 2015 05:10:07 Europe\SeklerlandSubject: RestaurantHello Emma. When I read your e-mail, I was very surprised about it. Well, I think it is really creative. If you want to visit me you have to do it in the next month because I have a football tournament, and I must participate. So what about next month, 12th of December? I would like to suggest a dish named "Bloody Liver". It could be strange for the others, but it is really delicious if served with corn. If you want to visit a restaurant, I would suggest the Magi. It is a bit far from my home, behind the fuel station once we left your car. To answer your question, I can not attend the party because I do not like these kind of parties, but I wish you good luck! Almos
We the management of The Arch London Hotel received your mail and wishes to let you know that you should make known to us the position you desired to work in via return mail along with a scan copy of your signed contract of agreement to enable us to make every necessary corrections. Thank you.
When it comes to public transport, the future is relatively dark according to the prospection. Indeed, all the indicators show that humane behavior will not change at least in the following decades. Car continues to attract people. In the other hand, Governments are not able to change transportation policies to enhance public transport level of service.  
Malaga is a town that takes care of the environment. Around the city, there are a lot of containers for rubbish, pieces, plastic and crystal. All people have very close someone to recycle.

Also, you can put clothes and shoes that you don't need it for Africa children. So, Malaga is responsible with the environment and with people with more necessities. 

Secondly, in Malaga there are strong and hard rules for factories. These companies must take care of the environment, or they would have to pay big tax to the council. 
So, in general, I think Malaga is very responsible with the environment and acts in consequence.
The way of living change every day : if we think about our grandparents', but also about our parents' life, we notice many differences. 
Above all they talked more: we live in the era of the telecommunication and none could live without their mobile phone or their computer. Be always in contact with our friends has become our way of living.
Moreover, also simple things are changed, for example the food we eat: some times ago everything was natural, healthy... but now everyone always eat "junk food" and things like that, which are completely unhealthy !
However, How will people's life change in the next 50 years?
As a result of what I have just said, in my opinion people won't have a "really life": everyone will be always more involved in the virtual life so that they will forget how to talk each other and how to express own feelings!
About the foods, I imagine a future society in which restaurant won't exist : people will eat only junk foods and food, which has been prepared before, food in tin... so all unhealthy things, which will cause many problems. For this reason, I also imagine that in the future, doctors and scientists will have so much to do!

Do not ruin our life, it could be all so perfect!
My favorite sport is soccer.
Also, we can learn to help each other in the team.
My favorite trick is nutmeg.
My favorite soccer player is Frank Lampard.
My favorite team is Chelsea FC.
My favorite soccer pitch is Hong Kong Stadium.
My favorite soccer is the Bravura.
I started soccer when I was four.
I often play soccer with my father and my brother.
When it is a holiday, my brother and I play soccer twice a week.
It is perfect to play soccer!
Everyone is afraid of something. A lot of people are afraid of catastrophic events, even thought it's very improbable that the same thing will happen to us. Some fears are instinctive, and it's positive because it protects us from real danger, it's a good response. But the phobias are which we experience that are life-threatening, and they can disrupt everyday life, but people can get over with the right sort of therapy. So if we want to live a life which isn't controlled by our fears, we must try to be more objective and pay MRE attention to the real dangers. We should spend less time worrying and more time being happy!

In 1898, H.G. Wells wrote his story (the war of the worlds), so it was inevitable; people began to see space creatures everywhere.  Science fiction magazines and stories spread. And the flying saucers' culture has dominated. They will be green. They will have three eyes, antennas over their heads, and guns firing green extraction. Furthermore, they want to occupy the planet Earth because, according to them, our resources are still virgin.

Alison read the note, smiled,and immediately put on her coat.
Alison put on her coat, close the door and went to his parent's house by car. She went to his parent's house because they emailed her that said that his father is okay after the operation.
When Alison knock on his parents' door, she noticed that there were many people in her parent's house, a man open the front door. When she entered the house, a man was looking at her with a bad face, when suddenly this man shot with a gun to Alison father.
Alison left the house very scared, it was a dream.

Nowadays, public transport is used for many people in the cities, we can find different types of them, such as bus
tube and train, but is there a future for it or not?, I am going to respond this question giving disadvantages and advantages, and finally I give my personal opinion.

To begin with, Public transports is not as comfortable as using our own vehicle, every day, about all in the morning, it is usually crowded, due to people that begin to work.

Secondly, moving in a city in public transport could be horrible, there are too many stations, and we spend a lot of time on them until we arrived at home.

Although I have written some disadvantages, public transport is better than private. 

Firstly, if anyone wants to move in the city using the car, that could be very expensive, due to traffic jam.

Secondly, Public transport is more ecological and less polluted with the environment, so as it is producing less polluted fume, and many of them use green energy, such as electricity or gas.

In conclusion, from my point of view, public transport is more necessary now than never before, cities contains more automobiles and the pollution is worse, we need to change our mind, and try to use them as other alternative to improve the environment of our cities.  
    
Last week, my class and I went to Sicily for a school trip. We visited many cities. The first day we went to Taormina and Guarding Naxos, the day after we visited Syracuse, the third day Argent and The valley of the temples and the last day we saw Marsala and Trapani. I enjoyed all the cities we saw,, but the best in my opinion is Syracuse. In particular I liked Origin that is the oldest part of the city. I also liked the Valley of the temples of Argent so much: it was amazing. I think that the worst thing of the trip is that the last night in our room there were a lot of insects and some spiders, and we must change room.
Public transport nowadays has become a bit uncomfortable because we cannot think of availability of seat. Large number of people use it, which results in over-loaded buses and trains. It takes too much time to travel by public transport than by personal vehicle. There is scarcity of buses in public transport and their timings too are not fixed. Traveling by car or any other personal vehicle is too much more convenient because it takes too much less time, and it takes us directly to the place where we want to go.
In a recent time privet transport is more convenient than public transportation, although public transport like buses, train, ferries and intercity rail are consuming less time and energy but sometimes its creation problems. In public transport people bound to share transport means with strangers, and also we have to pursue company policy or regulations, but with their own transport we don't have to bother about these things we travel when we want and when we have time. We don't have to book tickets for private transport. So we can say that travelling in their own transportation is more comfortable. 
People had drove car to go a work. The city have a lot of traffic. They prefer to go work car than bus. Public transport is very cheap then car and reduce traffic in the city. It's true, drive by car is so much more convenient, because people don't need to wait bus. They can drive any hour, they can to go and to come any moment. They can travel to another place, independent in the hour. Bus, boat and train are public transport most used for people. Some cities there aren't boat, because don't have river or sea. It's comm in city, the bus. Some bus have special and preferential sit to old people. This is interesting because people are practice solidary. I think could have a lot bus in city. Many cars is fluent for planet and is allergic to people. The train don't have position. This transport is better to population and don't have traffic in city. Another idea is ridden a bicycle and to walk street. This can help healthy the people and city will stay most clean. So we must reduce by car on street. We will be very happy and we. Will be more healthy.
My favorite sports walk, I really like this sport for several reasons:

1- It's very common, I can do it anywhere and anytime I want.
2- It's very cheap, I will not buy anything to do.
3- It's not hard sport, in all cases I will not be tired after walking.
4- It makes me relax because I stop doing my activity from work and study.
5- It gives me big time to think on all my life without any distributions from anybody.

Cause all these reasons, walking is my favorite sport.
From few years, people use different types of transport. We ride by bus or by car. We fly at plane or something other. The travelling by car is more convenient in my opinion. 
Firstly, you save money if you use a car. When you ride by bus, you pay more. Moreover, you travel with the other people. You stay in queue to buy a ticket. 
Secondly, you should feel uncomfortable. At some means of transport is too crowded and you haven't' t got a place to stay. Sometimes you lie on a window. It isn't good.
Finally, if you ride a car, you must care about timetable. You can go at every hour. When you go by bus, for example, you must wait at cold bus station. I hate this.
At sum up, in my opinion, travelling by car is better. You have comfort, you feel better. You don't have to worry that you don't arrive in time.  

Unfortunately, it is very sad to say that people in my town does not care about the environment. 

We need to start doing something to avoid contamination.

There are so many little things we could do to care for the environment. So many storms, and all the things happening around the world, are the result of not taking care of the only planet we have to live.

 I suppose they're lifetime intolerable, restless and I really sympathies with them Majority of outstanding and appreciated people are frustrated. They turn into arrogant and furious idols because of shortage of private lifetime perpetual attention. That is a pitiless trial for celebrities, bit through thick and thin they go on. They achieve the goals made exceptionally in sake of money and vanity. I realized it is not worth it.
Thank you for your care. There is one thing to confuse me, that is the old extension number. I always answer some wrong calls and these calls distract me. I receive many calls looking for the previous worker, and I need to spend my time to explain what happened to him. May I have a new extension number? Thanks for your help.
Dear Jo,
Romania is a beautiful country and has many jobs.Also, there are many places to see, mountains, lakes where you can relax and have fun. The jobs are nice, and you can work for three months. There is good pay also. I also work in summer as a waitress in a terrace. It is good and people are nice.

See you soon.
Hi,

I hope you are well. I'm writing you a letter because I was made a short film with my friends, and I want to tell you what is the film about and how was the experience.

The idea to make a film comes up a Saturday night at a meeting of friends. At first, we thought that the idea was just a joke, but Jake, one of my friends, said that he had carried a video camera. When Jake said that, we start to roar with laughter, but then, another friend offered the idea to do a home film. The experience about the film was amazing, because we laugh all night, and we enjoyed that very cool idea. In itself, the film didn't have an especial topic, but I can describe it like friend's film as appears a lot of laughs, jokes, and it reflected that friendship is the greatest thing that exists. 

By the way, I¡äm sending the film together with this letter. Let me know about you and your life. 
Hope to hear from you soon, 
Bianca





Running is my therapy. I started running to lose weight and ended in a life-changing experience. 
Some may say that running is very similar to religion, but to me is more than that. Running connects me to my inner Goddess. Running is cheap and everyone can take up running, no experience required after all it is just one step after the other.
 
In My country, bus's car is the essential public transport. So I got a lot of troubles: 
1. Everyone spends many times to travel.
2. Bus car's driver doesn't care in people who around him. That means he is a careless, who always drives too fast, 
But public transport has advantages: If we use it is the essential transport to travel. Therefore, environment will be improved. Maybe traffic's accident is decreased

I am writing to report on the local transport of Toluca.

The public transport most used in Toluca is el bus because it is the cheaper, but it is very bad and unsafe, the quality of it is very bad, the buses are old and obsolete these have broken windows and old and broken seats. 

The service is very bad the drivers are very angry and stressed out these do not lead with caution, in Toluca exist report of high rates of accidents by buses.

The public transport is unsafe because growth of the theft and kidnapping express to users.

I suggest changing the old buses by new buses and put security cameras in the buses. That the cameras transmitted immediately the image of the robbers at other buses to ensure that they are alert, and that the drivers receive training and sanctions by conduct bad.  
I think we live very quick, always running, we don¡ät enjoy our lives. Because we want a lot of money, a lot of things... we are always working for giving more money, we don¡ät meet our neighbor for example. Maybe in the future will be worse.
There is no future for public transport because car has made life so easy. It's economically and practically is more expensive. People
prefer to use cars instead of public transport. It's saves time. In old times luxuries were not considered as compare to Health, but now every one prefer to save time and maintain privacy which one can only afford by using her/his private transport so gradually public transport losing its charm.
Public transport 
I think it's very important as it reduces the problem of both pollution and population we use few transport as it is big and carry a lot of people. Underground, trains and buses these means of transport are cheap, so it helps the poor to save some money. Governments should take care of public transport they should save means of entertainment peoples should keep them clean and safe if they use it carelessly it will be useless Now There is no future for public transport, because travelling by car is so much more convenient. Cars are faster than public transport, so cars are more convenient than public transport it is easier, faster and more comfortable especially in long distances, so governments should improve public transport as not all people have cars 
In all times and places, there is always some typical food of the country where we live.

My name is Laura and I live in Argentina. Here, in this country there are typical dishes, desserts, drinks. Some of them are, roast, mate and some others, but those are the best known.

On the one hand, I like to have things typical in each country, apart from they are delicious, because when you've got the opportunity to travel, you can go and experience with the food too.

On the other hand, the bad thing about when there are so delicious food, it's that always you want to eat some typical food of your country and at the end it's very bad for the body because we eat them in excess.

In ten years, they didn't change that things, because they are delicious and no one would like to eat anything other than roast!
I think if the government do the best work about the transport, they can save it. The public transport is the best way to save the planet and have the best atmosphere; also, we save money and can meet people. It is true the car is more comfortable, but it uses a lot of mineral recuses like petrol with can contaminate the ambient. I don't think the public transport does not have future, there are a lot of people who can not buy a car and has to use the community transport. 
Public transport is very much complicated nowadays.  Place like Mumbai is full of People and no place to park the vehicles. Day by day, people are increasing in Mumbai. Crowd is more and all the people want to travel by public transport, so it is difficult to travel. Best way to travel in their 
own car or van. This will save their time. Transport is a good way to travel from place to another place. I had word with a boy, and he will reply to me by tomorrow. It will be good to interview both, and you can decide. I am hoping this boy will come for the interview, as he was saying recently he has got a new job.
Is the Internet the greatest invention of all time?

Internet is a useful means for everyone, so we are getting on with distant friend, and we look for important information when we are studying or entertainment themselves.

First, I am going to talk about advantages and disadvantages for this topic.
First advantage, is Interest too much quick, for example when you want information about something.  Second advantage is Internet by website, such as Twitter, Facebook... You allow to speak with your quick friend, or you can meet with them by website, therefore you do not call by telephone, so internet is too much cheap.
According to disadvantages, at present, children are always playing with his computer games and mobile phone. Both computers game and mobile phone have got internet, as a result, they have not got time to the another traditional games.
Other disadvantages are that, people do not meet with friends, since they speak by website Internet, so every time there is unless relationship, the people are not sociable.
To sum up, Internet is progress more important in the world, but too there are a lot disadvantages and advantages.
In my point of view, Internet is useful for everyone, but we should not abuse, so carrying out another activities.

Good Thriller was not my favorite type of gender until I saw 'No Escape'. This movie is about what happens in the real life right now, on the other side of the world. They persecute an American family that went because of the dad's job, which was something about a company that the natives from that place hated most. Without expecting it at all, this family went somewhere over Asia to start a new way of living. In other words, they had to get use to a different kind of world. 

It wasn't that easy for the couple with two little girls. They had to escape with the doors from the country closed, while making sure both girls didn't get their minds full of junk (people killing). And in some scenes, the little girl escaped, or the dad had to make them jump from a building to another one!

Anyway, I wouldn't want to ruin the ending,, but I would definitely recommend you to see what happens next!
Helen, I didn't expect this. It was a huge surprise for me! I really appreciate your card that you sent me. It made me speechless! I have never got anything like this. I celebrated my birthday without any complications. We were having a good time.



 
Hey, I'm HOA. I'm a student in the Academy of Finance.
I come from Nine Bin province.
They are 5 people in my family: my father, my mother, my older sister and my young brother.
I want to become an accountant.
Hello Mr Smith,

Sorry so much, but I can¡¯t go to class next week because I have to work. Saying that, could you tell me about next week¡¯s work? I¡¯ll try to work at home. Thank you.

Regards,

Laura P¨¦rez

Dear Dublin Lost Property, 
       I lost my phone on 15th Jan 2017 at 5 pm in Dublin city center. I still remember using my phone in Dublin city center at the entrance. I lost my phone near street no 1. Here is description about my phone - model iPhone 6, gray color and there were scratches on backside. 


Thanks,
Ritesh
Dear Principal of the Effective Learning School

I am interested in your advertisement you post in an English language magazine.

Recently I have got a job offer from a company located in London, and it requires me Lets score 6.5 for visa. I have studied this exam not at all, and I have got a very limited time, around 3?months, before the last test, so I would like to begin as soon as possible.

I am working daytime so nighttime, 6pm to 9pm, or anytime on weekends would be good for me except on Mondays and Wednesdays when I play basketball as a hobby.  Also, I am thinking of studying with you for 2?months, but we can talk more about this later.

I am good at speaking and listening sections but not confident at writing, especially an essay I¡¯ve never learned in my life,, so I want to focus on this writhing part more than others.

I am looking forward to hearing from you soon.

Best regards.
Samuel Mo

Travelling by car is much more convenient,, but all know really there is no future for public transport. When we talk about public transport, there are many people and everyone travels but I think we do not feel relax are there and if we talk about travelling by car. It is the best or much more convenient for us. Because we can travel anywhere but in public transport we can not travel to any other sites
I think there is a big future for public transport, because a lot of people want to take that and more than anything else that is convenience.
Especially some people don't have a car and some elderly persons difficult to driving a car by themselves, so the public transport helping them a lot.
Already public transport have been improvement and that makes comfortable to go on a trip, but I think that will be able to become good quality more and more, because so many people expectation.
I like a car as well, but when I have to driving a car I have to think about parking a lot and I can't enjoy meeting other people to talk while I am having travel, so the public transport is making connection with human beings. It is why I think public transport is really important for public and there are a lot of important things is having a possible in the future.
Every Human has points of strength and weakness. So, the Humans including women and men should behave according to these points. The question of which is rising now should the employer hire women in some posts and excludes them from another, and so that for men. 
There are two answers to this question, the first one is to who sees that it is right to exclude women from some jobs. For example, the builder needs physical strength to carry cements and bricks. The mechanic should have the ability to afford the drawbacks of the job. The second answer is it is not correct to exclude men or women from any posts. The explanation of those who support the second answer is every one had borne equal in duties and rights. So there is no one can hire someone or give anyone a job according to gender.
Is convenient to take a year off between leaving school and starting the university? 
I think it is not necessary and not recommendable because you have the possibility to earn money and is difficult once you get used to earning money, you want to study again. Also, if you want to travel, you have to make money for that and then, travel. Furthermore, you don't study during this period and when you want to start the university you wouldn't be able to remember some important things
So, if you take a year off, you have to think about it.
People use public transport because of saving money. But now they are earning more money than they earned before. Therefore, it is likely to imminent that public transport will no longer exist in the future.
Think has a future that all people use public transport then I think that maybe continue to have future but has bad and good things, for example good is easier to move in the city, and you save time, and the bad, bad people attack you and steal things, but I think, that have future, because a lot of people even they use public transport to. The people use the public transport also the people need to move for all the city. What I'm saying is that if you have future public transport that people use so much that you will have future
Convenience is not the only one consideration when we are travelling.  A lot of people choice public transport for travelling because it's cheaper, easier, more relaxed and sometimes faster than driving a car. In recent years, governments encourage people to take public transport because of fuel crisis. Some of the governments invest much money to construct public transport network to make travelling by public transport more convenient. When driving a car, we will face a parking space trouble in a city. Besides, a traffic jam is another problem. So, I don't think there is no future for public transport.  
My mother is my inky best friends in my family, she always listening to me, sometimes I call her with her real name!.
She always tells me some jokes but sometimes I laughed !, i love her so much, i don't know how will my world being like without her and I want to know.
I pray every day to save my mother and all my family to me.
My name is Tom, I'm 12 years old. I have a black skin, black hair. I'm short. Furthermore, I am wearing a shirt, and a pair of trousers. Furthermore, I will wait for you at the train station
Well, there¡¯re a lot of sport that people practice every day,, but I have one which is my favorite. It¡äs basketball.
This sport has a lot of type of match which you can play. You can play with your friends or in a team, even alone, but this option is the most boring. Basketball is a perfect sport because you can develop your reflections and your ships with people. 
I enjoy playing basketball because I relax when I play it and I can meet new people and travel around your city or your country. That it¡äs the best because you can visit the cities... And you enjoy between your mates and live all those special moments with them.
I can give you some advice to start practicing this sport. This¡¯s a sport that improve your friendships and it¡äs so good for your health. And maybe you became a famous player or a simple player,, but you feel like a famous. But it is important to enjoy yourself. 
The old house on the hill is a landmark in my city. At the beginning of its history, my city was a big farm. A river passes by the city and, occasionally, there were floods on the place. Tired of having their house destroyed, the landlords decided to build a new house on the hill, so they wouldn't be molested by floods anymore. There is a tale that mentions a treasure hidden on the house. This treasure was used to finance a civil war that took place in the south of the country. After the war, the gold has been left in the house. People came and destroyed the house, looking for the big treasure. 
I absolutely disagree with this statement. There are 7 billion people in the world, and it is increasing rapidly. How many cars for all people in the world? Have you ever driven on the crowded city and moved with 1?km/h? More people use public transport, less car on the road, you can walk and enjoy the city. Besides, it¡¯s also an environment problem, exhaust fumes engulfed the earth, more car is used, more exhaust gas release, we are killing our mother. 
In addition, those who live on below average incomes do not have money to buy car. Automobile is luxury in some country, like mine. It¡¯s the way to prove you're wealthy, when you get a car to your home, or go to school, work by a car, people will change their mind about you. Public transport is being become a must-have mean with many people who have low-income. 
In conclusion, Public transport is our future means, I mean for almost citizen. Not car, though it¡¯s convenient.

My favorite sport is swimming, it makes me feeling comfortable and left me in a good mood, I go to swim twice a week, and my advice to anyone want to start to enjoy every moment of it 
I have read an article on IFL Stalks about a sheep has human face. It shows in the video that the sheep actually has big nosed and lips just like human. Which is one of the weirdest thing I have seen. They say the reason why he has a human face is the farmer gave his mom an extra dose of vitamin A. As a result, that causes to deform in his face. In my opinion, I think it is just coincidence that the sheep looks like a human. On the other hand, the farmer who owns the sheep refused to sell the sheep for higher price than normal to the circus. I think the sheep should be transfer to a place where is specialty in animal with same condition.
Life is a long journey.everyday, we gain more & more experience. We become not only older but also wiser .we learn but the most useful thing to learn is to get in a lot of experiences & for sure to make mistakes .but we have to be honest with our selves by admitting our mistakes to avoid them in the future.
I am in Kyoto to eat Yatsuhashi. I have seen Meiji. It is very beautiful. Because there is turning red! I have never seen this view. I play badminton with my family last night.
Dear Jo,
As you know, my grandmother actually lives in France with my cousin John, unfortunately he has to make three months course outside the country, John will leave France next weekend, but instead it is not possible, I have to go and look after her because none of my family can't waste three months over there.
I am so sorry for delaying your visit, which was planned months ago, however as I told you is not in my hand, but I feel like it was. Why don't you come to visit France instead, Spain? Could be amazing!
Just think about it and give me a call.
Send my love to your family, and a big kiss for you!

Dear Sir Stuart Thomson,

I am writing to you because I would like to book my holiday from 0:00 a.m on Wednesday 26 August to 12:00 p.m. on Friday 04 September. 

Yours Sincerely
Mariusz Kaczorowski
I will talk about my favorite sport. My favorite sport is football I enjoy playing football with my friends we play at night, it was very excited to play when the sky was rain. When anyone miss passing the ball or miss scored a goal we're shouting on his face are you crazy how you missed this goal ! But we were too interested. We enjoy watching football match 
My favorite sport is football. I'm not good at playing it, if I prefer to play volleyball, but I like to watch the games. The emotions the only try if you're a fan of any team, and you know the happiness that you feel when it wins, it's indescribable. Football is usually a sport that appeals primarily to males, but I'm a girl that sometimes I realize that I know more than some males. I started following football in 2007, just 10 years old, I started because I fell in love with a team that then led me to love football in general. I like to watch the games at home with my father, but mostly always go to the stadium with my dad, you feel indescribable emotions. And my father was to convey this passion.

The future for the public transport shouldn't be taken lightly, in my opinion, the public transport is the best option for ending the problems with the traffic jam because when we use a bus or subway, a lot of people is travelling from one place to other in only one transport or vehicle. For many years, the public transport had allowed that the people travel a long distance for work that otherwise would not be possible. Better still, the future of the public transport is essential for a better life without traffic.  
When we used the car, for general, one person is the unique who is accustomed to using your own car, so not is exploiting the potential of this car. At the time, we need more cars for more people, that's the meaning for more traffic. It's for this reason that I think the public transport is a great benefit for the society, and a good way to move us of the one place at other, I suggest that the government has to give more means for the purpose of improving the public transport. 
Hi Freddy,
I have received your letter. I apologize to you for not writing sooner, but I've been really busy lately. Your party sounds extremely enjoyable. Here, parties are normally for family and friends. The man usually wear their best suits and the woman have long dresses on
George's restaurant is a very pleasant place with many tasteful recipes from all around the world to enjoy alone or with your company, your dinner. The Head-chef is an experienced and skillful man in his work. The food, his team of chefs, prepare is always magnificent and the decoration a piece of art, not to mention that the decoration is fully engaged in the Head-chef. Not only the food but also the restaurant itself is a very beautiful destination. Designed by famous decorators and their partners. With the latest technology systems for lighting and beautiful painted walls with great masterpieces of well-known artists and upcoming talents. Last but not least, the service is remarkable. Waiters being happy to help anyway they can and working hard enough to reach their full potential, so they can relish you. So fairly, George's restaurant is one of the most universally recognized restaurants
I'm afraid I'm not quite with you, even approve public transport will get more in the future.
You can't disagree our global become urbanization in the future, can you?
That become our life more and more crowd 
 Today's television! 

Once you have in mind by inviting others to get home and watch TV is what people expected! The big deal is entertaining, and quality is part of it. Keep it in mine what you should do before buying your own dreaming TV. 

You should consider that large and being untouchable TV is what you must find in one. However, people nowadays look for a good design and not for quality, the big problem is that prize is against quality, even though a good designing of TV series on well known stores is the big option that we can choose to check.
 
Consider a good prize and good quality by checking and visiting stores, you should not spend too much money by buying the biggest TV or largest, you can save money by only watching few minutes on stores, have you sit, enjoy and list if you are convinced. In conclusion, enjoy watching movies in your own TV considering prizes and qualities, some TV brings you the experience to enjoy your favorite movies in other scenery, will you try?
People who reach 18 have to complete military service is an issue, the supporters suggest that is helpful for the 18 to train the physical fitness and psychological quality, whilst opponents point out that is harmful for the human right and affect development of the country. Consider both aspects, that can be concluded that government should respect the human right and set up a new department which use for people who want to apply to complete the military service.
In my opinion, our lives will have a dramatic change in the next 50 years. You just have to think that 50 years ago we didn't know what a smartphone or a laptop was, in the schools we used a book of paper and not tablet or iPad, and now technology is part of our lives.
I think and hope that maybe in 50 years scientists will find a cure for many diseases and that would change our life because we could live for more time.
 1, Alamo Street
                                                                               Alameda de Osuna, Madrid
                                                                                             28042
 


Dear John :

I want to thank you the invitation, but I wouldn't go to the party because is my sister's s barracks.

I apologize to you.

Best wishes.

Your friend

Maria





I do currently master, but I can devote myself to the Fellowship Especially since I finished the Pre-Masters, and now I need only follow-up from time to time with my guide Academic, so I have the time for the Fellowship.
I agree with the statement that Mark Twain is the greatest American writer. His works are known by all over the world. When I read his poem" The adventure of Tom Sober" I was exited.
The last thriller I have watched is "True Detective" from HBO. That is an eight-episodes film. First I would like to tell about the atmosphere of the film. That is like you are going down downstairs to a dark room and feeling curiosity and fear at the same time. I was impressed because I've never seen before such films. That slow-motion action is so impressive that I have been seen that only for one day. Particular I would like to point Mathew McConnahy's role. Philosophy of his hero is so much different we used to think every day that I have taken a look on my life from another point of view. Last time I was so impressed from watching "Fight Club" of David Fischer. I really recommend that movie to watch. 
Hi Lara,
nice to meet you! I'm Lorelain, I'm 36 years old, and I'm from Rome. My hobbies are reading, travel and cooking. I usually go to the sea on Sunday morning. I've got one brother, Francis. Furthermore, I work in advertising, I'm an account. Furthermore, I hope to see you soon. 
Lo
This report is aiming to give a clear idea about the environment preserving in my town.

First, the local council organized a competition promoting ecological awareness and encouraging the local community to preserve the community.

Second, New rules were legislated condemning any person intended to harm the environment in any way.

Third, supporting the recycling by inventing three types of rubbish bins for hard wastes, for liquids and the third for clothes.
 I am a big fan of Arsenal. So it comes as no surprise my favorite sport is football. 
football is considered to be the most watched and followed sport worldwide. I would like to look at this sport from different perspectives. Firstly, football plays a vital role in unifying people locally and internationally, for example it helps US and China to normalize their relations. Secondly, football generates money. Thirdly, from an aesthetic point of view, it was call the beautiful game by Pele. Although I have been playing football for years, I am still not a professional player, this may be because I am not talented.
We will know today some information about Islam, Islam is great religion come from The Arabian Peninsula and it's founded since 1436 years ago.

Mohammed is a kindly prophet born in small city called media and travelled to another city closed to media called Alaina cause the people of media were very aggressive, and they are not accepted the new Invitation for the new religion

Mohammed came back to his town media after that and forgave the people of media whose abused him 
Hello dears,
we will talk about "How people is live will change in the future ?"
I think the principal thing in our talking is The internet network, computers, technology and communications.

Education will not be in the schools and universities ! , but it will be on the internet by many methods like : Self Education, E learning education, in many websites like : EDX and Coursera and distance education.

The Shopping also will be on the internet, every thing will b !



Dear Sir or Madam,
I'm writing you because I'm interested in applying the job in summer camps. I saw the advertisement last week in the newspaper and I think that I'm the right person for the job. I¡¯m forty years old, and I have experience about looking after children in my town because I have been working in a toddler school as a teacher for four years. In the other hand, I like swimming a lot and I had been playing tennis in a local team three years ago. Moreover, that I am a kind-heart person who enjoys meeting people a lot.
In your announcement, you told about working in kitchens; I live in a small town and my grandfather was a farmer. He had lived near our town and I used to spend my holidays with him, and, of course, I used to help him with his cows and rabbits, so I could do this work again for your company.
Finally, I think I¡¯m a friendly woman who likes children and wants to work and learn this summer in U.S.A. so 
I look forward to your answer soon
Faithfully

 The diagrams show how banknotes are made.
 Firstly, design the banknotes' background color it is artwork security issues. Second preparation, metal plates. It's skilled machinists. Then the sheets of banknotes print. Printing color on both sides and special ink or images slightly raised.
 When printing finished, they should inspection. It the most important step. Printed sheets manually inspected. Finally, they found good quality sheets and some partially damaged sheets or bed sheets. They will packaging and distribution the sheets which is good in there. In that time they at first cut into separate banknotes, second they packed the sheets and dispatched.
At the same time bad sheets and banknotes securely destroyed.
Why not?. Firstly,what¡äs for your education?, It's very clear for me that education is to create the conditions to do your thinking grow.
If the way to do that it's easy and nice, I think at the end is better than explain theory concepts.

Other reason for my opinion is that almost all the people prefer use the visual sense and ear to other person more than write and listen to understand new things.

While we are spending good time watching TV, our brain is not in calm, only in another position different to that one's in the rest OD the day. That's why I think that it's a good moment to see the thing through a new glass, and that can be a very high opportunity.
Definitely, No always, It depends on the kind of program, but I Think that nowadays a lot of television overt help to the people develop more effectively.
Hunting is the funniest thing I know.  I like to hunt because it is so peaceful to come out in the forest. I start to hunt when I was seven years old. Furthermore, I hunt with my dad and my stepdad, we hunt all different animals. The animals I like to hunt most is birds, rabbits, moose and roe deer. I hunt most with my dad, and we always have really fun when we hunt,, but sometimes we can be a bit angry on each other. My dad and I have three dogs, and we hunt moose, rabbit and roe deer with them. Their name is Pluto, Krocken and Zelda. When I'm with my stepdad and hunt, we have very fun because we live in a cabin, and it's a hilarious man as I laugh every evening and have very fun. They've got many mosses,, so they shoot very much of them, and they shoot at least every time I am there. My stepdad shoot a very big moose when I was there with him and I get the trophy of the moose.
Dear all
I Am communicating to you, with the purpose of let to know that we will set up a meeting at my office with the purpose of discuss how we could use social media to improve the Communication with our suppliers, I think a great time for the meeting could be next Monday at 4:00 p.m

Kind regards
Armando Mart¨ªnez 
Mr. President

I am going to communicate to you something about the military service. The purpose of this letter is to pontificate you some complaints that some citizens has, this is related why only boys have to be in the draft of military service, and girls does not have to. I think if we want to have equal rights for both.



Kind regards 
Cesar Vega
Hello Sam!
How are you? I fine. Thanks for your letter.
Yes, I have a favorite restaurant. It's near my home. When I go to the restaurant, I always eat Mexican food such as tacos or fajitas. It's perfect! I don't mind eating every day there! However, I just go to the restaurant in special occasions, such as my birthday or when I pass an exam. I would like to go next Friday, do you want to go with me? I hope to hear from you soon,
Bye,
 This diagram is used to illustrate the process of how to make banknotes, covering seven main stages.
 First, we should think out a design and decide the background color and artwork, or even security issues. And then for the preparation of metal plates, the skilled and machinists is considerate. Nect, printing,sheets of banknotes printed (50 banknotes per sheet)color on both sides, and speedwell, the most important step is inspection, we should print sheets manually inspected.
Have you ever spent the holiday to combine fun and knowledge ? 

When I used to spend my vacation in Mecca after the doing my Oprah, I visited several places, among them was a house for teaching the holy book of Quran. 
This house is characterized as containing large numbers of students who memorized the holy book of Quran. It is located between the neighborhoods with the aesthetic character if the alias design area. And conservation mechanism followed in this house encouraged students to become a part of it.

Finally, if you want to rest and good companionship, joined to this house.

Pyramids were not made by machines or computers and that is form the secrets of the ancient Egyptians of how they can build a great building like that form about 7000 years, and it is still strong till now!. People from all over the world come to Egypt to see its great civilization, around 2 million people come to pyramids yearly, you can be one of them. Come visit the land of peace and civilization.
Dear Sir or Madam,
I am writing to express my interest in applying for an English course. 
First I would like to present some background about myself ; My name is said Ahmed. 
 my English language is weak, I like to improve it which complete my post graduate study, 

 
 
The reason for choosing this specifically English language in September future I would like to get to know more information about an English language course. 
Our school is organizing a fun fair.
This activity is fascinating that you cannot miss.
Do you want to know how funny it is now?
Keeping your exciting and joining the event.
You will gain a sense of satisfaction.
There are a number of reasons that you should join the fun fair.
It is meaningful enough that you can raise money for the poor or somebody needs by purchasing.
It is kind of you to join the event and buy something.
Furthermore, it is such a perfect activity that the school can show the great to others.
As one of the members of the school community, you cannot miss the event, can't you?
Also, there are some performances after the fun fair.
It supposes that you can enjoy the show.
If this several reasons why you should take part in the event cannot draw your attention, you may try to search some information about the event last year.
It is hoped that the successful fun fair or student's experiences can attract you to participate in the fun fair.
It is believed that the fun fair will be hold successfully too this year's.

My favorite sport is fitness. I love to go to the gym, because there we will meet new people, make friend, and we can relax.
I always go to the gym, I look all the time separate 1 hour and half for that. When I am there I can relax, and I try to do not think about my problem and my work.
I enjoy all the time when I am there. On Wednesday after that I go to my belly dance, I love, because I can express all my feelings. Sometimes We have presentation and competition. I am feeling very proud about that.
I think all the people should practice one sport, we can feel better after that and that is very good for our healthy.
Effective teachers have a clear and consistent communication and management skills. The teacher use lesson time effectively . Spend less time to pass. Classroom management is good. Studies and monitors students' progress, help them to deal with their problems. Students must take a serious assessment about himself.
It was a cloudy and cold October night. I was in a park when I saw a man standing just behind me. So I started to walk away to there, but the guy start to follow me. So I should to walk quickly until I can enter a old and alone house behind the park. I start to walk through the house until I listen to a noise. Then a ghost appeared in front of me and the guy appears behind me. Then I woke up and realized it had all been a bad dream. End.
I live in a small city called CACEIS. This city is located in the north of Extremaduran. In CACEIS take care of the environment. The People in this city are aware that there are care of nature. Therefore, in this city there are not many factories.
The people recycle the rubbish, and they throw the rubbish at different containers. The yellow container is for plastic as water bottles, the blue container is for cardboard as milk brick, the green container is for glass as glass bottles.
Every day, sweepers clean the CACEIS street and the people teach their children that the rubbish don't throw in the street.  
Sagrada Fam¨ªlia, or also called Saudi's Cathedral, is a very touristic Roman Catholic Church located in Barcelona which is still in construction. Antoni Gaud¨ª was the Catalan architect who design it in 1798 and in 1882 its construction got started. Nowadays, due to the actual economic crisis its construction has been stopped with an undetermined data. 
It is interesting because it has 

Dear Sir or Madam,

when I was ten years old really I like to play football too much. I have joined football-teams which is near to my home, I prefer to this team because of my family is not reach, they can not provide for my transportation fees to go exercises stadium. 

The team is not very famous,, but I know in the future will be. I try to be a football player in there. The team name is coming location area which is ASTRAY. I prefer to play and watch football as well.

I want to advise all students that start this sport for heath and to fore way for stress, Sports mean is not like to spell time and to loss calorie. After making sport you will feel your body to be coming strong, and your brain will be without of stress. Therefore, everyone must make sport according to them ability. 

Finally, I prefer to play football because of my health. 
In my life, many dreams have existed in my mind, which is sweet, incredible, magical or horrible. However, one of the dreams is keeping in my heart that I can't forget it forever.
 One night, as usual, I slept. In a flash, I rolled down from a mountain and I didn't know where I was. It just a very long tunnel where it was dark and strange, After,I felt my body ache. I began to yell that hoped someone could save me to leave from here.
 Fifty minutes passed, when my body no longer was sore. I decided to walk to the end. Constantly, I just walked like without terminal contest. While I struggled to walk. Finally, I saw a light to appeared my eyes and I woke up.
 Seeing same light appeared in my eyes. It lets me feel that it's a strange dream.

Nowadays, we see an enormous improvement of infrastructure. Nevertheless, travel by car is easier for commute for example, because they can choose a personal timetable without a terrible discomfort of buses; in addiction there is a fair chance that by the end of this century dwellers will stop travelling by public transport, in special way if the government have invested his money in green energy, and we could discover a new green car, which in turn revolutionary our life.
Well, the form that we use the television depend on each on. Will has people that use the television for fun, most of the time; but has too their people that use television for searches. For example, the Chanel '' Animal Planet '' has a lot of information of animals and how it lives. 
In my opinion, the people use television for distraction. When we come after the job, or school, we need a form to relax. 
Maybe studies we make otherwise; in search on computers, in books, etc...
The television's use is staying more and more utilized by the people; so we are getting more problems of vision. It looks like a kind of addiction... We need to use the technology on our behalf.
The capitalist's world make us increasingly become us updated. So we have to watch the national Journal for keeping us connected.
Nowadays everybody has conditions to buy a television, so the numbers of the TV viewers get up; even being poor or rich; most can watch a movie, or a documentary. There are no apologizes to be an informed person.
To go shopping, is one of these things that you can love or, like it happen to me, you can hate at all.
Normally, I¡äm not spending a lot of time on going shopping, even when I really need something. In general, I find it very boring and stressed.
If I must do it, my favorite way to shop is the high street of my town, or in another town or country. These shopping centers, full of people and noise, are crazy! 

Shopping online is neither, from my experience, a good way to shop. In my case, I¡äm always wrong with the sizes and to return the products, takes me a long time and a great effort, so it doesn¡ät worth it.
Much better is to take a walk in the high street, and make from this time something for pleasure.


Socializing online help us to contact with our friends by easy way in different places and this way cost us money. Socializing person does not cost us money, but we need one place to contact each other. Finally, we enjoy in both ways in our life.
For the last years, the public transport has been forgotten.
Now, public transport is not the future, because travelling by car is much more convenient.
The people, who don't use the public transport, think that travelling by car is much better. But they don't know the big problem with the pollution.
I think. If everybody uses the public transport, the world be much better. And the people will be stress less, because they will be not worried about parking places or be in the traffic.
Maybe it will be a perfect opportunity for the people, being more healthy too.
Compared with local bookstores, publishers or media such as newspapers considering the Internet market, public transportation has much better future.  

There are two reasons.  The first reason is that public transportation carries humans.  Humans are the most sensitive luggage. You have to take very many cares when you carry humans. Even though people trying to develop drones to reduce logistic costs, it is difficult to apply the technology to carry humans. The second reason is automatic driving technology needs some more time for the development.  Also, the automatic driving technology is already applied for trains.  The running costs will be decreased.


We are going on a vacation Next week. We prefer to Take A Flight To Hawaii. Furthermore, we love to travel there and here, but this is the place I wish to go long time ago.
I hope it would be fun there .and thinking about the beautiful scenery makes me felt that I must go while I can. I can't wait till the day comes
Dear |Had eel,
How are you doing? And how is your family doing? I hope you are all doing well. I received your letter yesterday, and I was really happy to hear from you. Following your letter, I want to tell you about The apartment is very Beautiful not big or small medium-sized left inside two rooms, a bathroom and a dining hall and an external director categorize overlooking a beautiful view I am sure he will like it to come and TRI condo b soon, n the end, I would say that I miss you too much, and I hope to see you soon.
Take care and goodbye!!!
My favorite sport is swimming. It's because swimming is really fun. Also, I think swimming can keep your body fit, and it can make the swimmer cool down when it is in a dummy day.
 The advice that I give to someone who want to start swimming. It is not afraid of water, otherwise they may not learn to swim and also when the age become older it will be more difficult to learn than the little. So these are the advice that I give for them.
English - I find it creating! I like learning English. It's my passion. I like talking to friends and I can communicate with other people. I can't pronunciation well. Furthermore, I don't know, the stress of words is where. It's so difficult. So bored when I can't continue to learn English.
Michael was little boy he was 10 years old, he went with his parents to his grandfather's home. The home was on a shore. There was a tunnel,, but its hole is in the deep. First he used to be polite and okay the other orders. Once a day he met a girl called Sarah she was 9 years old inspire of Michael was bigger but Sarah could control him. Every day they went to the sea playing and swimming until the sun set .once a day Sarah made a challenge with Michael about who can enter the tunnel from the hole in the sea and get out from the other hole on the shore but Michael was afraid .he was telling himself which animals could be there or is there were air there, but he has no choice, so he accepted the challenge.Sarah told him she will go first. She took a breath...deep one and started to dive. Micheal was afraid he was waiting for Sara to get out he went to the shore to look if she went from the other side, but he found no footprints. His mother called him he went home and still thinking about sarah.it was night and GE was afraid to get there again. He went to sleep.Michael closed the door and knew at this moment he had made a mistake.
The job announcement on your webpage immediately took my attention, as it has always been my dream to work for the German-Norwegian Youth Forum and the requirements meet just the skills that I can provide you with.
The first time I took part in the youth forum was in 2012 and since then it has been a big part of my life.  Influenced by it, I started to look for universities in Scandinavia. Since 2013 I am studying English and Marketingscommunications at University College Syddanmark.

It is well accepted that shopping is not always enjoyable, and following is my reasons.
Firstly, shopping can waste you so much time. You may not realize when you're shopping happily. But you may find that when you notice you have many things still need to finish.
Secondly, shopping can make you upset because of something you cannot afford.  You may come across something, such as luxury bags, but you cannot buy it because of the tight budget. Furthermore, even you just buy something you can afford, you may also waste much more money.
 So, based on what I have written, I think shopping is not always very happy. We can find something much happier than shopping easily. 
My favorite sport is cricket. I love cricket very much since from my school time. Cricket is a game of bat and ball in which there are two teams which have eleven players on each side. Generally we are using cricket ground as an oval shape. 
Travelling by car is certainly much more convenient than travelling by tram or trolley bus, which only follow the lines of their routes. But thinking about the environment, traffic jams and sometimes absence of parking places makes me changing the statement. On one hand you put all your things in the car and drive anywhere you want to, on the other hand if you feel not very well to drive, you have no money to buy a car or the downtown of your city is closed for all the means of transport except for the public ones: tram, bus or trolley bus is your layout. 
I think it is true, because o lot of people like travelling by car. But there are some problems like these - how will drive a lot of people who don't like to drive or can't drive because he has some problems with the health. Anyway, a lot of people will need some transport in some cases not private, but public, and we can't say that this kind of transport will not be useful. May be, in small part 
Some years ago when the weather was colder here, people had eaten more meat with wine. In fact, growing vegetables was not possible because of the weather.
In fact today, people interested in drinking wine during participating at parties or meeting with friends.
There are various opinions about how foods plays essential role in our lifestyle. Potatoes and meat are popular food between our people. Although healthy diet is quite expensive, young people follow special diet in order to have better body shape or healthy life. Actually modern life affected on our palate changing. Instance some people who work majority of their waking hours prefer to use fast food more. Our commitments impose us to forget ourselves and our healthy. 
It may because increasing wight or reducing the number of necessary vitamins which our body needs. In my view, the reason of having more energy during the day lies in the diet program which is followed by each of us. In conclusion if we have decision to living long, following suitable diet is crucial and unavoidable.
The members of my family is nowhere near my best friends. You see, I do not see members of one's family ones best friends because personally I didn¡¯t and still don¡¯t have a great relationship with anyone in my biological family. And this may have effected my way of thinking and acting in different situations. So no, my members in my biological family isn¡¯t my best friends. 
Michael and Marcuangolo were friends, but in the school they were enemies. They had amazing battles in the playground.
One day at the end of the classes, Marcuangolo wanted to hit him, and Michael ran away. Michael stopped and hit his enemy. Marcuangolo fell in the street. A car crashed and Marcuangolo started bleeding. Michael took his enemy to the hospital. There was a doctor at the emergency room and Michael explained the problem to him. The doctor was angry and Michael cried. They brought Marcuangolo to a room and put the boy in a bed.
The doctor ask for his phone number, and he phoned his parents. Michael understood that he must take away. Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.

As soon as I came to university, my life changed. Before I entered university, life in high school hadn't a lot of friends, and I was so lonely, but after I started to study at Ton Due Than university, I became happier, comfortable and interactive. In my class, I have a group of close friends, and they treated me very well. I'll have a friend at university because I scared strangers. The first day when I studied at the university, I had a lot of friends. We sit around together and talk about where they live. At the weekend, I like going for a walk and get some fresh air with my friend. We laughed and eating together. I was very happy at the time, and I have the friend sincerely. I expect we'll be the best friends forever. It was a wonderful experience with me
I was walking to a football training session with my friend Michael last week. It was raining and it was dark. The weather was horrible. We were talking about the last match, we were discussing our faults, when suddenly we heard a loud noise. It turned out that a bus hit a truck just in front of us. The people were screaming. Some passengers were hurt and weak. I ran to help them, and also be called the ambulance. The police came after 5 minutes and the ambulance too. It was a scary situation. We were shocked!
Hi Isabel 

I am living in Delia which is located in Dubai. It is small and quiet city. I like the Indian restaurants in the city, in addition infrastructure and roads are well organism. 
Obeying to the statement above, it's necessary to say that is a very interesting topic, because it's quite related to actual problems, such as problems in the environment. This is to say that most part of cars are not green, namely, current cars are not designed to generate a good impact in the environment. Regarding the reason for the described situation is due to the strong economic interests of oil companies which are intended to get as much money as possible, regardless of the damage that they are causing to species of plants and animals. Thus, the question is, travelling by car is so much more convenient for whom? For multinational maybe? Or for some consumers that can afford a toxic and expensive car?, even though, when the public transport gets so crowded, is less harmful indeed, in terms of the impact received by the environment, because it means more individuals in the same place, meanwhile each new car means increasingly pollute. Travelling by would be more convenient, with a good conscience to protect the planet. 
 The idea of banned cars from the center of all major cities have advantages and disadvantages. The good things about not allow cars in the cities centers are that the traffic will be reduced, the trips will be faster, and the contamination will be less. On the other hand, the bad things are that you have to park out of the city center and these areas will be crowded, you couldn't visit places with your car and people with physical problems could have difficulties with public transport.
 In my opinion it is a good idea, but perhaps the restriction could have exceptions for certain people and certain days and hours, or if you need to visit a particular place with your car you could ask for a special permission.
The village I live, there is a lot of vegetation for that reason we try to protect environment, some of the things we do is to give maintenance every week to the vegetation zone checking if there is any garbage, to avoid this we teach the younger¡äs environmentalist actions, so they don¡ät throw cans, paper,or, candies to the floor they also can help the older people, there are cases which a person throws garbage to the street¡äs, floor or to the vegetation to avoid that happening again we have a punishment that is to pay some money if the don¡ät they won't be allowed to enter the village park and zoo again, unless they were visitors, in that case we told him or her the way we live in the village and, we give him or her advises to keep a beautiful place without garbage.
More environmentalist action we use is to protect the wildlife by taken care of them there is to that we have a center of care and, other more institutions, we also make environmental protection centers where people can visit and learn about this to sum up our village is very concentrated on taking care of the natural world that surrounds us
Dear Sir/Madam


I am one of a student in Telemark University College. I am studying Literature and Language bachelor program. Furthermore, I am interested in this major so much. But it is not relevant for my future life. 


If it is possible, I would like to change my study program. It is from bachelor program to 1 year's program.  Could you help me please?


Sincerely
Loan Glad HU Patel
Students: 012345

Hello Jo!
How are you? I have just received your letter. In my country there are many interesting places to visit and is a country to improve with your job, also is easy to start a job. There are many jobs access and many types of jobs. This country are many interesting places to visit, if you want to have adventure you have to go to the Aconcagua in Mendoza. If you want to have fun you may go to marque de la Costa, there are many interesting rollercoasters. And if you want to go to the best museum of art in Argentina, you should go to Malta.
See you soon,
            Richard.
In my opinion, public transportation is the most convenient way to travelling. The air pollution is a one reason that I prefer public transportation. On the other hand, it is very economic than one car. Whatever, you can save the time and go anywhere more quickly by public transport. 
Nowadays, in school we learn a lot of subjects, which we less or more use in our lives, some of them are really important, but some of them are just wasting of time.
On the one hand, we hadn't to range subjects by their 
I was born in Dangerous hospital, 2001. When I was born I weight 3650 grams and I was 52 centimeters tall. I have one big brother, he is 14 years old and goes to moray solar. I have only lived on one place in my life. Furthermore, I like parkour because it's really fun, I also like guitar and playing video games. The best place I¡¯ve visited is probably Orlando because I like all the amusement parks and roller coaster. My favorite is the hulk roller coaster at Universal Studios. My favorite foods are pizza, tacos and Kebab.

The given topic to write about is a common issue nowadays in my country. Public transport is not convenient for most of the people because every person wants to reach on time at his place, but using public transport it is very difficult to reach on time. 
Dear Linda, 
My name is Lorenzo. My height is 1.65 meters. My hair are browns and my eyes are dark. I will arrive in the Central Station at eleven o'clock, and I will wear a red cot and a yellow scarf. See you later. Thank you very much. 
Lo
Hi friend,
In this holiday I go to Barcelona with my girlfriend. It is an amazing city, it is really enjoy. You can see monuments, theaters, beaches and different shops. It is the most European city of Spain. 
Rosetta becomes the first spacecraft to orbit.
 After a long flight, it reaches the orbit that is very long way far out of the solar system. NASA replied as a very amazing achievement that Rosetta reaches out of the solar system. This may become a have leap after Armstrong landed on the Moon. NASA replied that Rosetta will keep on its journey on travelling across the Universe.

Travelling by car becomes a comfortable factor nowadays because we can stop and go whenever we want, we can start at our desired timings. This would gradually kill public transport. One more reason is that banks provides loan at a lower interest which makes people to buy one to improve their comfort level.
 People's lives will not change if they don't change themselves. Everyone wants to improve his life to be better but how without doing anything. We must start with education and healthy which are the most important things to be better. Everyone needs to focus not only his education but also on others. To learn, to read, to be knowledge. We need to focus on our inner skills and improve it. No progress will happen without plan. Each one has a dream, want to achieve it but first he needs to put a plan and also cognitive one. Our great example in changing is German. After the second world war, the improved themselves in 50 years and became one of the most developed countries.  
In my city, is very usual to find many dog's shits in the road. It is a big problem, and it is almost a miracle not stepping one.
The solution I think would be to fine to owners. I think that not is a problem of awareness. I think the people know that his dogs litter the city,, but they prefer not to do nothing. It is easier and more comfortable. If they would have to pay then they would do. 
In general the city looks clean. The cleaning services work well. Normally in the night.
In the hall, tow care about city Center. There are plants everywhere. Madrid has many parks and many trees. These also can be a problem because recently they are falling because they are older. The hall tow has created a group that works studying the tree's age to prevent further falls
We should be must proper planing for our city to proper look after of it. Actually, there are many huge problems are in your city, just as there are no any proper drainage system for it, not any specific canal system through which we can properly clean our city. There, is another issue that is due to huge transport but little road they are not wide enough so that most of the people are distributed due to these issues.
Dear Mrs. Kate Ashby,

Hope all is well with you.

I would like to invite you in exciting job offer for your weekends in my caf¨¦.

Your position is manager of Green Pepper caf¨¦, so you will b responsible for managing all level and add your experience in order to improve our caf¨¦.

Also, you will manage approx. 16 person, and you will have a full privilege to handle them as you like.

We are locking for salary range between $42 to $90 per hour, and only 2 day per week.
I hope to accept my offer as soon as possible, and I hope to see you with our staff as well.

Our address is 12th, Arizona, United States.
Tel: 001012345678901

Thanks in advice.

AMR Haldane,
CEO, Green Pepper caf¨¦
Istanbul, Locate in Turkey. It is the capital city of Turkey, and it takes a large area on some there are a lot of people were living in Istanbul . Istanbul's buildings so simple and have special design than other cities. I think it will beg hanged to become bubble city and contain more of high building. What arr, if it changes or not, I will like it more than any place in the would.
Hello, 
My name is Alejandro Mart¨ªn, I¡¯m 30 years old, I have heard about your organization and I would like to work for you. 
It¡¯s known that the different recently situation that there are now with young people. 
I used to go to a Christian school here in Granada, in this school there were good values like share or help to other person. 
Moreover, my parents, who are teachers, they have been teaching me how I must educate, for several years.
I asked myself If I had had the possibility to change the world, I would have tried to do all that in your hands. I always think this, because teenagers are the change of our planet.
So, if you need a person like me, I would like to work with young people.
I¡¯m looking forward to your reply
Best of wishes.
Alejandro

I was born 2001 in August the 10th in Dander yd.
I have two little brothers, Gus and Sore.
Furthermore, I have always lived in Dander yd.
My favorite sports/ hobbies are windsurfing and sailing.
The best place I ever have been on is an island in the east archipelago in Sweden. It's not many trees there and a lot of high mountains.
There is much that i`m proud of in my life, but actually I don`t know what i`m most proud of.
A very big weakness I have is that I can forget nearly everything, especially homework and other school stuff.
Three words that describe me perfect is:
happy, funny and sometimes bothersome
A thing that I would like that people knew is that it's not a good idea that wake me when I'm sleeping.
I don`t actually know.
Some day I want to go to Bali because it`s seems like a really nice place.
Three things that I could do with is a bike, to be sick and bad computers.
My favorite movie is the wolf of Wall Street.
I don`t have a favorite book.
My favorite song is prayer in C
my favorite singer is AVICII
Simpsons or family guy.
My favorite food is filleted beef with BEA and pommel.
My favorite restaurant is TGI Fridays. 
when I learned to wind¡äsurf.

If you have a car you would probably think that travelling by car is better than by bus, but there are a lot of people who doesn't have a car, so they are used to going by bus and for them this way of travelling has become more convenient because they have done it since they were children. Then whatever the opinion you get is the result of the social situation in what you live.
Most people say that using public transport is better than using cars, and they say that its cheaper and better for the environment, about me, I think that cars is easier and affordable way to transport between places, because cars is here any time and so near to your home instead of public transportation which you should take a walk to reach it in most countries, and also cars available all the time, you can go at 4 am and no one say anything, because it's yours, but most public transportation is available only for the day hours and few hours at night, in emergency situation for example, what you will do, if you do not have your own car, your kid is sick, or your wife or your old parents, and in general the more we depend on ourselves the more our government able to help the poverty and homeless people out there, who really need more help and aid from the public community, we merely ask the government to improve streets and the traffic light systems, and more oil stations and parking in the streets, to be able to drive and move easy and safe and in a short time.
Everyone uses public transport every day. It is difficult to imagine how we can live without it. But in spite of this, a lot of people have a dream about a car. The most said that using a car more convenient than using public transport. Of course, private transport has a lot of advantages like: you don't need to wait for a bus at the stops, or you can go everywhere you want in the time convenient for you.  
Dear Alex,
Long time no see. How are you? You know, it has been a long time since we have met each other, why don't we go to the cinema. We are going to find a romantic movie or fiction movie. So what time will you finish session? I will wait for you in the gate cinema.
Please respond at your earliest convenience,
Best,
Phone.
27-dresses is a romantic comic and funny film, it is recommended for all ages. I saw it with my family, my children and my husband, we had a good afternoon.
The film is based on a girl, she is invited to many weddings in which she is a maid of honor in all of them. She has twenty seven dresses of maid of honor, meantime, she calls in love with a boy who is very Hanson, but he is working in a magazine, and he has written about weddings in the city, he is a good writer, and she unknowns that.
The plot is well constructed, since the beginning becomes quite gripping. The main characters, the actors, are very younger and enjoyable. This history develops a mixture of themes that courage, family values, friendly and love.
In conclusion, if you want to have a good time, you should go to the cinema to see this film with your family, because it is an interesting and emotional film.
Nowadays, we have a lot of environmental problems. Transport solution is one of the most dangerous. Almost every family have more than one car. As a result, roads are overloaded and long kilometres' traffic jumps damage open air. On the one hand, that quantity of cars can't be forbidden, because its personal right to have it or not. On the other hand, the government should think about some measures for protecting environment. For example, inventing several special dates in a year for using only public transport. Also improving measure might be as an increasing green areas in cities and towns.
Rivers and seas are in danger too. Unfortunately, many tourists don't take care about saving personal spaces (on the river bank or on the sea beach) in clean. Factories damage the nearest areas and water extremely bad. In my opinion, firstly, new building on the banks must have forbidden at all. Secondly, rules for tourists about caring environment must be very struck.
I think, nature'll get the most important benefits if everybody takes care about own space in the best way.
When it comes to health, it does cover physical and mental status too. Sports is a unique way by which a person can maintain his or her health, including both aspects that are physical and mental. My favorite sport is Hockey. The different formats of cricket allow me to maintain my health based on time available after earning my bread for the day, and it is needless to say after sharing the precious moments with my lovely family.
I often participate in friendly matches to keep physical abilities up to the mark. While putting a lot of stress on physical abilities, it is needless to say the day can be tiresome if one may decide to play in the longer version of the game, but it is equally challenging how you would keep up your mantle status. 
It does require exploring your brain while developing strategies against the opponents. It becomes essential to create a spontaneous Plan B when Plan A did not work. Top of all, one has to learn to maintain the sportsmanship, irrespective of the result or heated moments on the field.
In the present world, television is very important. But sometimes it can also affect us in a negative way.most people around the world can see any news in live. Media is more helpful for the people.television is also using as a study material for example smart classes,
online courses etc. television is more important media we can improve our language with the help of the television. Now we can see 
that so many films with the help of television, and we can see other programs also. According to the present world without television 
no one can live as a human being so that we can say that television is more impotent.  
Michael was a serious boy, he had the ability to behave in good manner, help his parent with daily activities. Michael's parents were absolute poor, they hardly paid school fees for him,, although they did their best to see him be educated.
One day, Michael were going to school for his final examination. 
suddenly, an old carried a heavy load hit him and fall down. When he got up he insulted him and tried to beat him, when he returned home, he closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
My name is Natalia Soraya. I am from Lviv, Ukraine. I am 30. Your summer camp is the best place to demonstrate me.  I can speak English, Russian and Ukrainian. I am a reliable, easy-going, hard-working person. Furthermore, I am prepared to look after children. Furthermore, I work as a teacher for ten years.  Furthermore, I am also a volunteer in the youth church club. All free time I work with children and teach them. I usually go camping with children to the mountains. On holiday, we do different sports, cook in the fire and have fun. I am the right person for you.
Hello! I am 32 years old girl from Italy. I really love to take care of myself and so the last years I decided to do walking every day in the evening. It's takes 1 hour and at the end I am very happy and in a good mood. I love walking near the Barbour of my city, so I can have a look to the beautiful sea! When I walk I feel the clean wind, and so I take long breaths. If you walk on the seaside in the evening you can have also the possibility to see the sunset over the sea....that' great emotion! I feel good in that way, and even my soul can have a breath. I suggest everybody having the same evening walking, you need just a pair of comfortable shoes!
There is no future for public transport, because travelling by car is cheaper than public transport.

Commuters prefer to travel by car compared to public transport.

The main reason for people don't like to travel by public transport is due to overcrowding 

Travel by train is very expensive nowadays.

People prefer the car rather than public transport due to sexual harassment.

 





 
Dear Federico,

Like you know, I was work in a youth camp the last year, so that if you want to take this job I would like to say some things that will help you.

In the positive side, the size of the groups is tiny. I had 25 children, and it is a good number for working well.

This kind of job is very useful if you want to improve your English skills. I recommend this experience.

On the negative side are the labor conditions. The money is not enough to pay the level of living in London and else the money for "travel expenses", in my case, arrived until November! Can you believe it?

In any way, I recommend that you take the job for August, because I have listened that in this month the organization is better than in July.

I wish you luck and a good experience.

Regards, Alex

Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately, that ha has planned two weeks ago 
this episode was his sister's birthday, " Now it is the suitable moment to announce her about surprise" peter said.
Then peter stared" happy birthday my lovely sister" peter said and gave here key of a car
Sara was so amazed and hug here brother and grateful him. After that the celebration was begun and a lot of their friends have attended each one presented a gift for Sara, she was very delighted and suddenly the doorbell been rung 
she was her old friend Tia. Sara stood and stared here for a few minutes and hug here and bowed here for coming and thanks here, they hadn't met for several years after they have finished their study. Really it was great moment and stay speaking together about many things and call the best moment that collect them together, stay speaking until the evening .and agreed to visit their collage at the weekend to recall the best memories, peter who is arranged this celebration and connected with Tia and prepared for all this happens Sara never forget that day.
Nowadays, each family has several cars to use for their daily needs. It's much faster, much more convenient than using public transportation. The only drawback that comes along using cars is limitation in fuel resources. However, it seems that each day a new source for extracting fuels is exploring. 
 Beijing is the capital of China, it is the political¡¢economical and cultural center, but also a city of long history. It was the capital of Ming dynasty and Qing dynasty. So it has much ancient architecture, like Ming Tombs, the Summer Palace, The Temple of Heaven, the Forbidden City. Especially the Forbidden City is the largest architectural complex which is best-kept in the current. It represents the highest architectural achievement in the ancient China. The Great Wall is located in the north of Beijing. It is more than thousands of mails long. It has been starting build from Qin dynasty, Its use was to resist Huns, but now it is a great place to visit.This architecture also represents the culture of China.
 Beijing is also a city which has many kinds of snacks and foods from different countries. You can taste Peking Duck, Sichuan spicy diced chicken, Henan stewed noodles and Due dishes...
 Now Beijing is a large international city, it will inherit the elements of history and develop much better.


My name is Kamaldeen, I'm 31 years old, I'm married, and I don't have children. I moved with my family from Jordan to Saudi Arabia in 1995. I began studying when I came to Saudi Arabia in third grade. Furthermore, I rose up in Al Passim region and I lived the best time in my life in Al Passim. Furthermore, I have big family contains from my father and mother and I have seven brothers and three sisters. Furthermore, I studied in Al Passim University and my major Microbiology. Furthermore, I graduated from my college in 2001 after that I got job in ministry of health and I have been working there since 2010. Furthermore, I like a lot of activities such as travelling, reading, play soccer and watch movies. 
I still believe that public transport will be more popular in the future due to benefits it provides for us. Travelling by car is more convenient but expensive. Travelling public is cheaper. On the other hand, not everybody can own the car. Public transport is suitable for those who have no own car. Besides, public transport will reduce traffic jam. Today, government focus on how to improve public transport, and they also increase their supporting. So public transport is improved continuously. I think it will be the favorite transportation for all of us. 
 
My favorite sport is volleyball. This sport cause fresh and jolly me and I think will exercise cause healthy. If you start volleyball, you need a ball and piece of ground that separate with tie.
Shopping takes place the biggest part especially to women, but sometimes it becomes not so enjoyable, and I agree with this statement. First, shopping is not satisfying when you are tired, or you are hungry, or maybe it is just your personality who doesn't like crowds of people walking around. Secondly, if you can not find what you are looking for, you will not beam with happiness. What is more, you will not be satisfied with the shopping if you lack money and can not afford to buy the thing which you really want. To sum up, I would like to say that, if you are in bad mood or lack of money, then you will not be able to feel pleasure of it. 
Nowadays, an increasing number of people are concerned about the phenomenon that farmland, forest and wetland is disappearing for some long-term human activities, for instant housing and transport networks is built by destroying the balance of environment.
 Firstly it is clear that more house and transport networks is convenient for our people, what is knew to us is that the population growth is a big problem, which is needed for more place to living. And building more transport networks is also benefit for us, for example, the high-speed rail can be shortened our time in traveling. While the animal may not welcome to it,
In order to command the psychology of user, it was necessary for me to know the new tendency of UI 
design. Therefore, with the good UI design, many people will have the user experience with pleasure. The good user experience will be good to collect data and be good for making a decision in commerce.
Once upon a time, there was living a little girl in a small town. She was very shy, sensitive and embarrassed. She dreamt about living in a big city where anyone wouldn't know her. Furthermore, she had just wanted to hide from this world. Her name was Lora.
Lora has grown up and become a very pretty adult. She has moved to Kyiv, graduated from university and started to work. 
Although she tried to hide she has become a great and a famous model. She has even got a boyfriend, Michael.
Furthermore, she loved him. He was her first man, best friend and lover. He was everything for her. 
He loved her for her flame. He wanted to own all she had. From time to time, it seemed to him that he loved her. But it was very short emotion. 
Once Lora came and told him that she was sick. She cried. But Michael wasn't worried. Lora noticed his coldness. She asked him to go. She was killed by his coldness. He went out.
Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
I am writing about the international sports I have seen monthly magazine.


I enjoy this sport because it is comfortable and elegant also you never hurt yourself badly. Furthermore, you also have a lot more confidence in yourself.


The advice I would give to someone who starting this sport. first you should eat healthy food to have a good physic, do more exercises and sleep less. Most people who play Tennis are always ready and proud about themselves.  
Every day I wake up at 05:00 AM and go to bed at 10:00 PM.  I reach home at 13:00 then I take my lunch and relax for an hour. In the evening, I watch movies.  
 We all know that do sport is very important to keep our life healthy and happy. My favorite sport actually is walking;and I prefer walking in the morning and before sundown. I like also walking in public street, gardens,clubs and on the shore. When I want to go anywhere;I do my best to go on foot. I like this sport since my childhood because I found that I can think about my good time when I was child and relax with myself to think carefully about my present and future. The walking can also fitness and do the knee stronger. It would be interesting to accompany your best friend or your beloved to enjoy your time. I advise my guys who suffer from laziness and overweight, try to walk one hour at least and after that they will like this sport.
Hi ! 
 I want to begin with one thing : I don't have a favorite sport or something on that, but I really like to do exercises for my body. I think it's important to maintain our tone and of course our health. Because, when we practice a sport or some simple exercises we feel how the body receives energy, that it's happening to me.
But we have concrete examples, which we should wear follow and which already demonstrated that nothing it's impossible. Like Nadia Comaneci or Gina Hagi, they are two people which succeeded in their sport but with perseverance and ambition. They are passionate about that they do, more concrete those are fall in love with their job. It is an important thing to love and like a lot what we practice, because that it's the key. The pleasure and your will help you to succeed and to get the best scores. 
In my point of view, this subject, the sport, the favorite sport is one of most pleasant for me. I love to do joking in the morning and then to do a lot of exercises for my legs and arms. If I do that, now the day is one of my best days, it's a managed day for me. 
In conclusion, I don't have a favorite sport, I like to do a little of all, and I don't refuse anything. 
Flora.
This crime was happened about six years ago. It was in Italy, exatly in Bergamo. Yard finished one of your training. Her parents, after a half past hour of the training's finish, became preoccupied. The parents called her, but she didn't answer. Then, when she didn't return home, her parents reported the passing of their daughter. The surveys were concentrated above all in the construction site of Apollo. In December 2010, Fire was banged-up by the police. Three months after her passing, she was rediscovered dead along the stream.
Definitely, the public transportation doesn't have any future. A good amount of the population prefer to buy a car to go to the school, work place, church on a faster on comfortable way. Every year thousands of cars are sell and the demand is growing. Probable, the only opportunity to change this will be to remark on people the opportunity to save energy and diminish the environment contamination if we use public transportation. 
 Television has many advantages. It is not only entertains, but also educates. There are many educational programs which we can get pen fit of it. Good films can also entertain and educate at the same time.
Football is the most popular sport followed in Italy and in Europe, in fact there is some important tournament where participate all important Europe team, They are called "Champions League" and "Europa League".football is a team sport in fact in this sport participate everybody without exclude nobody.
The people start to play football in a regulatory pitch, after some time they will be tired, but it is normal because their muscles are not enough strong for running around the pitch for many times. If you often train, your muscles will become very strong.
Another thing you do not have is the ball control. The ball control is the control you have when you run with the ball.
You can improve it running with the ball, and gradually you will improve your ball control. 
 Pollution as a problem in the environment

Years ago, pollution was not a big problematic to deal with. Technology was not as advanced as it is now, so the amount of waste was small. Our ancestors used to live in an unselfish life. Nowadays, pollution is a problematic that we have to solve before it gets worse.

A new way of transport but be included. We are used to driving a car, and we do not notice how much damage we cause. We should start using new ways of transport, as go by bike or by walking. Not only will solve pollution, also it will help us to discard obesity. We Should include new alternatives of transport in our routines.

Rivers and seas are victims of modernization. We have no idea of how much damage factories causes to the rivers and seas. In fact, the factories waste goes to the rivers. The government should improve a new law to regularize this damage. As we can see, modernization is causing damage in rivers and seas.

In my opinion, Pollution is a problematic on the entire world, not only in modern countries, so we should try to recycle more, any kind of help is necessary.  
Dear grandmother,
How are you? I haven't seen you for a long time. I have a new, beautiful pair of shoes. These are white with black and blue lines. I love it. My mother gave me for my birthday. 
I'm going to celebrate my birthday next week in my house. Would you like to come? I'm going to invite all my friends and family. It's going to be amazing. 
See you soon. 
Jazmin.
Hi Jo,

I am very happy because the time spent very fast. I didn't have anything new about you. You can come here when you have time because my house is your house. While you are with me, you will do curriculum vitae, and after we will travel around my country, and we will become a good workers.

This idea is fantastic, although this will be very complicated. However, the best option is that you came here, and after I present my friends and their fathers because they can help with your job.

On the other hand, I don't recommend travel because this is very expensive. If you came here, you will see a lot of country, and you travel around the world. But it is your decision, these options are my advice.

I will look forward to your notice about your decision, but I am very nervous because if you are with me, I will have the best summer in my life and I will be very happy because we will do parties with a lot of friends.
You must remember that the money are very important in your decision.
Noticia
And I went to open the door. I was really comfortable in my bed, i count believe that someone interrupt my calm. But, whatever, i Jen. To the door and open it, result that was my brother.
After that say hi and go with him inside, he told me that our mom was goon to a trip for a week, and we have to take care of my little sister.
I was a little worried because I love my sister,, but she was younger and I had a lot of work.
Whatever, I decided to said yes and prepared myself to take care of her. My brother go, and he promised to return later with my sister.
I closed the door wishing never have to opened again, then I went to the bathroom and took a relax shooter.
I practice Pilates Method every Sunday morning.
I like this sport because it is a simply healthy sport that respects my body.
Furthermore, I practiced dance a long time ago but with ages, I've preferred to practice an easier sport. 
I discovered Pilates 2 years ago and began with an old Bear dancer. He took time to explain each movement and made me understanding the concept.
After 10 times I obtained results on my body: stretch, sinewy and flexible.
If I could give advices to new practices of Pilates, it should be to read a book about this method and to take time choosing a good teacher.

A few years previously I took part in one program name called Christmas Drama. In my school ages I did not participate any program even sports. Because school teachers never encourage me to participate. If they told me to attend compulsory, I will do without any hesitation.


While I was in ANDRAPRADESH every year we have Christmas function in December, although we are not interested to attend Drama they were not leaved us without participation even simple character. They gave me a character like THE GOD. Firstly I am never aware about how act and do this particular character. And from October to till December we practice every day after our study hour up to eleven "O"CLOCK.DAY BY DAY I learn, and finally I did my role well. Then I think to myself why I wasted all my school days.

Personally, I believe that those who are not participate any activity the teachers has them to encourage. Then only they also know how talented they are. Every student should attend and show their talent. After some ages, we can not attend any this type of activity because we all are become old. So let do and enjoy your young age, be happier.
The future of public transport in developed countries is very different, because most people have a car, in the people who live in poor countries, most people take public transport, because people doesn¡ät have a car and is cheaper to take public transport, the pollution of public transport is huge and is growing Third World countries should have, eco-friendly transport.
 I didn't use to believe in that people would do everything for advantage, even betraying family and friends. I thought that was only seen in film. The real world would not like that. I strongly believed people would rather have love in the heart than everything. I wasn't rich, not having many good things, only a sample person, but I lived happily. At least I had a stable job, lover, family and friends. 
     However, these things have changed, All the things I have been owning, building, remaining are broken. It is hard to believe my eyes that I could see the avidity under their eyes, as if they couldn't wait to see me dead, they can't become brilliant so long as I am alive. I have always tried to convince them that I am not that bad, some people said.  
My family live in the city center of Madrid,, but I don't like living here because it is noisy and there is contamination, so I decided to move to the county side two years ago.  I love this place because it is relaxing, but the only problem for me is I live alone, and I'm lonely.  
My mother knew my feeling, and she wanted to help me. She came to my house with a present last week and when I opened it... I couldn't believe it, "It was a little and beautiful monkey! I was so exciting and very happy. For me, it was like to have a new member of the family, and he lived with me.
Since this moment my life changed, and now I go to every place with "Yang" monkey's name 
Dear Sir/Madam
I am writing this letter in order to apply for the job in the "USA summer camps". I saw the job advertisement in the local newspaper.
To start with, I would like to tell you that I have studied gastronomy in the Institute Brandon, one of the most recognized institutes in Uruguay, also, I have just finished the sports and health course in the Universidad de la Republican, in which I learned to work from children to adults in the sports area.
I think every people love sport. In the world, very famous sport festival is Olympic. There included many kind sports such as wrestling, basketball, tennis, running.etc.
My favorite sports are basketball and martial art. First, Basketball is team sport when it means I need to understand expression of members of team and keep contact to them for example my roll is cutter but I need to do assisted, blocker and guarding when I play.
Secondly, Every country have own martial art history and culture that is lungful from China, taekwondo from Japan and Karate from Korea. It's not just fighting these sport give people durability, speed and power. Especially, I like karate and Lungful. Man and women whose are possible to interest it. There is no special criteria such a tall and strong muscle or gender. These 2 sports improving human basic ability to reach as possible high capability.
I suggested to other people first to understand yourself such as what do you like, which is possible and then practice after every success 
My favorite sport is badminton.
 It's a game between 2 or 4 people. 
they use a bat and a shuttlecock which is like a bad feather. 
purpose score most points.
 I sometimes play badminton with my brother, and I always win. I think I am a good player.
 My first play badminton when I was 7 years old.
 Positives ways for playing badminton: you can lose weight, your vision will be good etc.
  negatives ways for playing badminton: your right arm is stronger than you left arm, sometime, you are sprained your arm.
 I'm sure is very heath for your body. 
 
According to this form, we can know learning knowledge stakes a part of time in one day. Unlike Taiwan's senior high schools students, their sleeping time average in eight hours even more.
As for me, my daily schedule don't have many options, just only study, sleep and others. Others include in rest and exercise, but they don't occupy lots of time. In my awareness, I know United States advocates free-style study and self-learning, so they aside from study, they have diversity selections. When it comes to my sleeping, I only have four to five hours in a day. The lake of sleep often make me can't concentrate in class. The more remind myself to get up early, the more things I need to do. So it usually postpones my sleeping time. The only common option is rest time, I also spend three to four hours. Because I think family and friends are my spirit medicine, they can give me lots of energy.
First, I am to say that people's lives change in the future, because the new technologies will change the lives of people.
I think this, because the new technologies are created by people for improving our habits. For example, Internet in the next 50 years will be very different, I guess that people will have a chip in our head, and they may do many things with your mind like if we need to call other people, we will think about it and we may speak with it.

For other hand, people make other inventions for improving the world and reduce pollution, for example, In this time we have created electric cars or organic food, these things are very useful in the future, because we will need to reduce pollution.

Also, people will need to improve medicine to cure diseases and for this, people need to create more inventions to resolve these problems.

Finally, I think that the best change will be in our lifestyle, We will change our clothes, thinking and other things, We will be more dependent, and we need more things for our day to day.
Although I have been having terrible jet lugged since came back to my country, It's great to see my family and my friends.
Anyway, I have to find a bird to develop myself and take a rest.
I never say goodbye to everyone because I will come back to England.
Michael is a teen guy that live with his parents. He is seventeen years old, and he has a sister. His sister is six years old. One summer tomorrow, her sister woke up very early. He was worried because his sister always wake up very late, about midday. Someone rings the door, and he opened, but there was anybody in the door, so he closed the door again. He listened a bit of noise at the top of the stairs but he didn't go to look that noise. The door rang again, and he opened again the door, his sister was with him, and she was very scared, but there was anybody in the door again.... and this time, the noise at the top of the stairs was higher, and he understood all. Someone was calling the door while that someone was stealing in your house... By that, her sister is scared and woke up... 

Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake

Twenty years ago, I started playing football. I had practiced a lot of sports before, but when I started playing football I felt that was my sport, this was freedom. 
I have played at a lot of teams. And just as I was becoming in a professional football player, my right knee injured. Then I have been operated twice. Because of injuries, I have now thinking of leaving football to dedicate me to other passion, the guitar. 
Writing emails in English can sometimes be hard. I moved to the UK from Turkey recently. It is not always easy for me to speak in another language constantly. I have to improve my writing. This is the reason why I'm trying this web page.
Sport is very healthy, it is very important that all people do exercise for their bodies. I love sport and I usually go to the gym. I like running, and I run three days a week. Furthermore, I prefer doing sport with a friend or my sister, it is funnier. If I run alone, I take my mobile phone and I can listen to music.

When you go owling you don¡¯t need words, or worm or anything but hope. This is the book Owl
Moon. This book is written by Jane Olen. I like that phrase Because The boy was happy because he got to
go owling and he's been wanted to go owling for a long time, and he finally got to go.
When other kids are happy, that makes me happy. I like it Because it makes me feel good Because you don¡¯t had¡¯t
(have) to have words to go owling but you had¡¯t to have hope to see an owl.
My name is Ingrid. I am be 24 years old, and I live in Rena. Physically I am blonde, 
I have blue eyes, and I am of average height. I like going to the cinema, get out with my friends, 
to playing the Counter Strike, walking to the park, going the shopping and can't stand watching the blood. 
I now am studying Software Engineering. On September I am going to Madrid to studying the master of 
Web Programming with my friend. I prefer living with my boyfriend. 
I am more romantic than my boyfriend. I hate eating vegetables and I love eating chips. 
I dislike is that I will be away from my family.
I am going to miss my family. They are very happy with me, because my marks is good.
Hi, Jenny

Well, as you asked me Jenny, the most brilliant actor than see before is VIN Weasel, it is an excellent professional and he protagonist a great deal of movies like the saga of Fast and Furious, Radio, Nannies bulletproof and other extras films. This is one of my favorite actor because, when he is recording a film, he assumes his role passionately and that is really important for a good actor.

Another of my favorites is Will Smith, he appeared in the well-known film, Men in Black and others excellent films like I am Legend. This is for me and many people an excellent actor because his personality is extrovert.

So Jenny, here are my two favorites film stars. I have to go shopping, sorry.

See you 

Franco.


 
This topic has a controversial opinion these days, That everyone should take a year off between leaving school and starting college or university. I am going to study the topics from both aspects and give my opinion in the matter.
A good percentage of people think that everyone should take a year off between leaving school and start college. They think that year the student can spend in job to earn money, so they can afford their expenses during college. This way helps them also to explore the job market, some jobs are in great demand compared to others. Or simply, the student can spend this time travelling. This way help them to get rid of study stress, and to give time to their social life. 
Others think that if students take a year off, study is unwise. As return to study may be difficult. It is better to finish study first then go for work or having relaxation with travel. 
 both opinion have their merits. In my opinion I Think it greatly depends on individual financial situation. As I have monetary that can cover your expenses on travel is totally different from if you have to work to cover your expense. Or you just have what is essential for education and university fees. 
Transport is very important in our life, because we transport from place to other places.
The development of technology and Industry very fast, so the public transport no future,
Must be interesting the development transport Even fits the times.
Hello Joe.
Congratulations on your wedding, I hope you will be all your life as happy as you are now. Jenny and you are a great couple.
Thank you very much Joe for think in me for to be your witness, I feel very proud that you think in me for to be your witness and of course I accept, and I will be in Toronto for your wedding. 
Joe we live far away since I work for the red cross, but I steel be the same person as I was at the school and I like the same things.
Joe I have the same memory as I was a child, and I don't remember too much Sophie. Was she at the school with us? Could you describe me her?.
In other way, I never am a witness, what I have to do?, tell me what Cain of suit have the witness have to wear, If I have to buy any color of tie, the flower.... really I'm very exciting with your wedding.
I will be at home for my mother birthday in November, and if you can,, we could have a drink.
Any way, congratulations on Jenny and you again.
Best wishes

Joe

Hello, good morning
I enjoy my favorite sport because I like running, playing and go to the forest. This sport is healthy and good for the body. You should start this sport for you feel good. Your muscle will be hard. For this is necessary drink water, eat fruit, vegetables and pasta. We don¡ät could eat sweet and sugar.
If you want to start this sport, you should start running thirty minutes.
Thank you for showing your interest in my village concerns with the environment. The town, Lahore, has been known for its practices to preserve nature. In our town, we conduct monthly meetings concerning waste management, as well as pesticides. We are very appreciative of Dr. Manjot Bar, who has taken upon himself to lead these meetings and educate our village on health problems associated with improper dispose of the waste. The village has built pits to dispose waste. 
The fact of using a cart to transport, is essential in life, and that depends on the car you want to buy and save gas.

When you drive you must take precautions at all times because if you can not cause an accident
Link Remember that a car is to make your life easier to transfer and save as a way also to bring security because you go in your car and is less likely to get mugged or something.
Some desventejas may not have the money to maintain it, and they always remember that the car should give you a service and not to him, which is why you always keep it in line with the engine, so you do not fail.
One day I visit my friend Jimmy in New York City, he was a young man who was specialist on trains and tourism, he talked about how the citizens and the commuters move from one place to another, he told me that the Grand Central Terminal was the largest terminal of the city, he shows me were the landmarks of the big apple were so sightseers could go, he shows me the city, and we went to different parts first he took me to Columbus circle in the south-west corner of Central Park where there were the most expensive apartments then we went to the lake were the jogging tracks that circle the lake area popular with early morning visitors, then we went to the museum of natural history that was located near the Metropolitan Museum of Art then I got focal on the subway trains, so we went to Grand Central Terminal when we arrive I was amazed to see many people going to work, so he told me that it was conveniently for people to use the train because is very fastest and for the government it was a great economic business then he told me that one of the characteristics of 
Dear Chris,
I would like to spend this Saturday with you))
Hope, You will be free at 6 a.m.
Let's meet at John's apartment. 
His party is always fun. 
All our friends will be there.
Summer vacation is so desirable that those in school or workplace long for it. To most students, the weekend is essential to them, because they are not allowed to play computer games until the weekends. In my opinion, weekend not only gives us enough time to take an adequate break but allow us to enrich ourselves. Similarly, summer vacation give us more time to do meaningful things. Such as visiting museum, seeing touching movies, doing exercises and so on.
Only by constantly do conducting my daily routine can I learn more information and become strong
In important meetings like UN General Assembly or G77, many leaders of power countries raise the environmental problems as the most concerned problem in their internal policies. Disaster on the environment not only cause many problems to human but also to all diversity of life. As a part of diversity, people, therefore, seek ways to reduce cause and effects of these coming disaster.
 
Firstly, I sometimes use my mom's bicycle to university, taking part to reduce the carbon dioxide emission from my car. Riding a bicycle also a kind of eco-friendly transportation. Next step, I reduce using some of the cosmetic products that provide or made from the materials cause a greenhouse effect. There are also many related products which harm the environment. 
Dear Juliet,

Thanks for your letter, it was a pleasant surprise. I am writing to tell you that I can't go to the marathon with you, because the distance is too long for me, I'm not fit enough for this. I'm sorry, maybe next year I can go. Last week I saw a bike trip to the countryside and how about registering for this?

Bye for now, I'm looking forward to hearing from you.

Love, 
Kristi
I think that I should pass because I worked hard and this is the last subject to finish my studies. I really think that, we should speak English. I don¡ät know how to study English and for this reason is very difficult for me. The next year, in October, I'll go as appear to Oxford. Where I hope to learn English. I think that it is the only way for me.

Yes, I'm talking with a family in Oxford. I should go in October. I love this family because it is a single mother and I think it is easier

Yes, I'm talking with a family in Oxford. I should go in October. For 7 months. I love this family because it is a single mother and I think it is easier


Dear Manager,

I am interested in the vacancy in your caf¨¦. In your advertisement, you said that you need a person who can work at weekends in your caf¨¦. I believe that I can be a good helper for two reasons. First, I am good to cooking. I had been worked in ABC restaurant until last year. Besides, I also so good at dealing with people. More information about my qualification, please see the attachment. 

Best regards, and look forward to your good news.

Bob



1250 
0100


The video game Counter Strike is a good game for the computer, I think that play it is a good way to enjoy.
In this video game, you can kill, jump, dance, and eat all you want, is a very good game I think that is the best "shooter" and that "Arctic Combat" too is well. I am a very well player in this, I know play it very good.
In conclusion, Counter Strike is the best game in the world.
Summer holiday,

I have been to Italy on holiday 3 years ago. I didn't have a long holiday, it was just for 3 days,, but these 3 days were the best in my life. I must say that I went there because my sister is living there,, so I didn't have to book a room at the hotel and spending too much money. I went to the Vatican and Rome, I saw their massive buildings which were impressive and their old houses. The weather was fantastic, I love bathing in the sun and resting on the hot sand on the beach.
Is Melody Martinez, I'm 26 years old, I was born in Mexico.
One of my passions in this world is to help people, any kind of people, old, disability, poor people and kids.
I think am a suitable person to care of children, because I like working with kids, is not the first time I work with children. 
I currently work with children with disabilities and I love it!
I'm good at improvising games to children, and good to cook too.
If you only give me the opportunity to work for the camp, I will never disappoint you.
Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately.
He took his backpack and ran really fast to the school.
Today is the big day, the day of his presentation about acid rain and your consequences on nature
Peter studded and prepared himself for this day for a very long time, because finally his mother will see him after four year separate.
Peter did a beautiful presentation and now his mother is very proud. 
Dan was a runner of the big leagues that wanted to get the worldwide record of the best time in 100?m. To reach his goals, he trained a lot with one of his colleges and he gave no importance to the judgements that people have over him and his ambitious wishes of victory. Although, he was always thinking if it was a blessing or a lesson I be competing. Either, he has an enemy that was trying to extinct his love to run and getting him out of the competence. 
The enemy thinks that the passion to fund of Dan will demise, but she doesn't count, that this love will be forever in his heart to fight with any adversity in his road.
At the end, he continues running, thanks for this, he approached his goals. 
Internet is the best means of communication. Internet nowadays is used all over the world for many goals. First we use Internet to discover the world's news, from Internet we can check and read world's most famous newspaper such as New York times, the sun and also electronic newspaper. Internet also can be used to learn and to educate yourself, internet allow us to read books, magazines and short stories. Internet is the most effective way to start a business and to look for a job, many people use Internet to work, and they're earning money every month. Internet is a way to make new friends all over the world through social websites such as Facebook, twitter, and YouTube. As a conclusion internet is making things better and easier, life now is always connected to the Internet. 
My name is Mariangeles, and I am going to show you one of the most magnificent places of Extremaduran, Monterrubio de La Serena.
Visiting this small village, you will enjoy a rural tourism with charm.
Feeling the dramatist and realism of the best known event in Easter, played during nine years by the inhabitants, "The Passion of Christ".
Discover the main representative museum there, the olive museum, where you are able to look at its history in each of their corners, besides tasting its exquisite oil.
Meet their Patron saint San Isidro and get the most out of their memorable party in his honor.
Inspect closely this unforgettable place and learn a bit more about the culture of Extremaduran. 

My favorite sport is swimming. Since I was young I like swimming and when I grew up I told my mum that I want to make competitions.

The first time it's difficult like other sport because you don't know, and you have to improve by yourself, but if you like it, you will find it fascinating.
Also, I remember my first competitions, I didn't win I was like the 4th, but I wasn't sad because I though that the next time I will do my best, and probably I would win. I went to swim like 4 hours a week, and it was amazing because I improve a lot and right now I'm one of the best. Last year I won the national competition in my country and that make me feel so good, because it's all I want.

If you want to take up swimming I will recommend you to do your best and if you like it, you will enjoy it at the same time you make exercise 
In the past, most of the people did not to worry about their healthy. In those days almost 80% of people have assured feel preoccupation about their bodies and their alimentation, for this they confidence me that they will try to improve their habitual alimentation every day and their will do sport more frequently. 
As I the most people we start to do sport because we are stressed and needed to go out of our house after a hard day of work or study. One day I went to do running and since that moment I have not stopped. The moment perfect is when you want, in the morning, in the afternoon, in the evening or in the night. It is truly that on summer we have to be careful with the hours are too hot, and we should avoid. It is necessary to buy a well-equiped sneakers, to make sure don't suffer a pain on our feet and the rest of body.  
In Tampico City the most important landmarks they are squares in Tampico, the better shopping they are mall Altaba abdicate in Tampico center and the beach Madero, the most important parks they are Carpenter's lagoon and my favorite restaurant is Child¡äs in mall Altaba. The beach at night is a one better place to happen with your family
Dear Ms Ana
Here I come to express my thoughts about what have been happening during these past weeks at the reception of the building.
I am happy to say that I have only positive points to present due to how welcome I fell when I arrive at the reception. Because of that, sometimes I feel free to ask them what I want and depending on the way they receive my comments I can just let them do the task I asked them without keeping on watching them.
In conclusion, I¡¯d like to offer my aid if anything would be necessary.

Regards.

Myth and fable are always my favorite types of stories, because they can either be easy to understand or extend deeper matters. Sometimes it is interesting to know a story by discovering their background first, isn¡¯t it? For example, due to the wide spreading of ¡°The Epic of Gilgamesh¡±, we all heard something relate to it, but don¡¯t really know about details. Amount of tradition and legend nowadays somewhat refers to its context, such as Homer's ¡°Odyssey¡±, the flood mentioned in the Bible, and especially Mesopotamian civilization. Therefore, I try to find out more information about ¡°The Epic of Gilgamesh¡± in order to understand it completely.

In conclusion, I hope that Riyadh city will be more interested in traffic jams. If the government gives attention to improving the streets, decreases using cars, provides other transportation, and controls traffic jams by police, Riyadh will become a great city, so the people don't worry about going out. I hope this problem will disappear soon. 
Dear Sir or Madam,
My name is Andrea, I am 27 years old. I am a very friendly person and I have experience in this area.
Last summer I worked with children aged 10 years old during a month and I had organized some activities on the beach such as football games and gym classes. For me, it¡äs a pleasure to make the time really fun.

I like very much to cook, and I think that there are some activities that we can do on the kitchen, like to cook cookies or make fresh bread.  

For another, thing I can speak English very well, because I had studied English in university, although I was Portuguese.

I would like to get this job because I love children, and I am a very patient person.

I hope you consider my application and contact me,
Andrea

In the future, this tendency will be continuing more and more specific social networking sites between business and personal life.  In order to this happen, looking out for new social networking sites designed are particular goals.  To be taken place of a general network like you found on Facebook, you will find sites are specializing at people, business and society.
 Having used cars to fulfill our transportation needs within the city limits it is a very good option for many of us, however the necessity of travelling overseas or even outside our suburban areas might require a different sort of transportation, therefore is where the public transportation should focus on since the long trips taking more than a simple commute in the city would require it.

 It has been a popular American tradition for many years now, since the mid-60s that we all use cars owned by private parties in order to meet our needs, hence considered the "modus operandi" ever since. 

 A new thinking might help to address this issue: transportation itself, perhaps, it is in need of evolution, that might be the use of public transportation, it has proven to be the best manner to get to places which roads and geographical areas might happen to be unknown to the traveler.


Firstly, all people can buy a lot of type of some things in my city for example in the center of the city we can be souvenirs because this town has got old monuments, theater and churches. In the north of the city people sell all types of food.  Normally this food is made when people did in the past, although, the best street market is in the west of the city.

On the other hand, you should visit a bookshop in a street marker. However, you can read a book while you can eat and drink some things in the sofa of street. You must remember that in the center of the city, you can visit the bakeries with the best sweets and bread of world and these sweets are cheaper than in other towns.

Finally, people can know the biggest shopping center of Spain, the situation of this shopping center is in the national street 445 in west of the city. 
You can see modern clothes while you eat in a restaurant, and you can take photos with a TV star, because they buy in this shopping center, and you feel a star, because you see a famous person, and you think that you are in a film.
The movie I decided to review for you is a thriller called The destiny. 

The plot of the movie is set in a small town where everything has its own eyes and because of that you must be aware of your behavior. All it begins when daughter will come to visit her mother and her stepfather. 

What I liked most was that you think you know what is going to happen, but for your surprise it always turns up for something unexpected. Despite the fact that there isn't any Hollywood star, all the characters are played very believable, and some scenes won't let you sleep. Even the scenery is not based on real story, it will make you think about accidents happening around you. 

There isn't anything special what I dislike, maybe except for the music which was used there. Sometimes I felt that the background songs don't match with what was happening but after all you are in expectations of next step, so you wouldn't mind it. 

I highly recommend this movie to everyone who wants to see happening unpredictable situations and likes the feeling of unknown.
Hi Isabel,
I love this new place. The town is called white city. It is situated in Merida. It is a quiet and beautiful city with many things to do and a lot of places to go. My favorite place is the beach that is near, just about 20 miles away from my flat. I hope you can come soon.
Jorge
In toward to modernization of life and technology, the people believe in different perspective about way of life, but the majority of ones is totally topic. Everyone wants a particular objects and individual life, as an egoistic human being; however, the realm world hasn't capacity to support these ideas. Actually, we have a lot of problems with traffic: lots of cars in the railway and it doesn't run; the number of cars in the street cause a dirty pollution; crowded railways causes a later destination. In the biggest cities around the world, the traffic nonstop and increase every day. We discovery, in this perspective, special diseases by traffic: stress, violence, pollution, insecurity, so on. For this reason, I believe that in the future we will return to use a green combusted and public transport. If the public transport will be by higher quality, faster and fewer rates, the majority of citizens will be preferred: is more calm to relax and read a newspaper or a magazine during the way in collective transport than an individual one; moreover, the time spend up to go and came back will be reduced, because it promotes less car in the railway. Thus, in the future, public transport will be more interesting than particular and individual transport. 
 Last month, my friend came to Korea and visited me. In the morning We went to Ocean Park, we saw dolphin, cat, horse and many animals. In the afternoon we went to play dollar coaster, I screamed on top of voice and called for help. Actually I hate playing dollar foster. We played mind train, punch and a lot of games. At the end of the day, I was just like running out of gas, because I was too tired to walk any further.
 Last day, I gave her a photo that was our first hang out and we hugged each other, she gave me a present and called me to keep it for her.
Nowadays, students have a lot of various form of education. They may not only learn in school but also through the Internet. It has both advantages and disadvantages.
The main advantage of learning per Internet is time saving. When we attend a school we often waste time on buses which we may intend to study. In case of Internet learning, we can oneself set hours of learning. Also, possibility of learning at home is a big advantage, especially for people who prefer peace and silence. Then it's better to concentrate of learning, and we don't feel any pressure or stress connected with asking and tests.
On the other hand, through the Internet learning on a long term we could feel bored or lonely, School gives opportunity of learning in group when students may help each other and resolve problems. Another disadvantage of learning per Internet can be issue with Internet connection. It not always work correctly.
My name is same. I'm 22 years old, Egyptian. When I was young, I enjoyed playing basketball. I thought that it's the best sport ever. It made me fit and strong. It taught me the meanings of teamwork and leadership. I kept playing basketball 4 years continuously till I joined the secondary school. My advice to anyone starting basketball is to never giving up and always keep playing till the last minute.

We are not alone. We live with people home are family for us. Relationship can be very different? From the best to the worst. But sometimes we start to call our sisters and brother our enemy, without the reason. Who is a brink up? Who cares about us? Who try to make us happy? Our enemy? Of course no. Our family is people who will love us, don't look on situations and who we are. We are always small and careless children for our parents, small and foolish for our elder brothers and sisters. And I can clearly say that they are our friend. We are part of them, and they are part of us. So we need to stand together.
Television and other things invented by technology are part of our lives. I think every family has got a television in the own home and for example I have 4 televisions in mine. For me, television has advantages and disadvantages. It's important if we want to know news of our country or world's news. There are a lot of interesting TV programs where we can learn something and there are also intriguing television programs. These are advantages,, but we can have also disadvantages from them. For example, we can become addicted to our television. It is not the best thing for our eyesight and our health. In general, I think our technology is not the best thing for our health and TV and other similar things are responsible for our problems with health and eyesight. So television has positive and negative aspects,, and it's up to us how to behave with it.
As to keep our mind good and healthy, we need to spend our sometimes in sport. I like cricket is the best among all of these sports, cricket is a good mind refreshing game
Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately. After calling the ambulance, he waited outside his car, someone who could help you. I picked up the phone and composed the number of his girlfriend, Lisa. She is a nurse, but he didn't receive any reply.
He thought that he must do something or his friend could die. They had a car accident, and fortunately he hadn't injury,, but his friend Sam was fainted. He tried to stop some cars that passed through the street, but it was useless.
The ambulance arrived. Sam was visited but beside the scary he had only some bruises. He came with him to the hospital, and at last it was a success story.  

 
I live in the beautiful city of Saint which is famous for its landscapes. If you come to Saint there are a number of shops you should visit. 
The museum of the Duo mo is the best tourist attraction.

Her name is Adriana; she is eleven years old. She is from Amazon, a little town near to Castell¨®n. She is an only daughter, so she doesn't have either brothers or sisters, but she has two lovely cousins called Daniel and Mariano. Her two best friends are Laura Garrity and me (Maria Rodr¨ªguez), she is a great friend with Carlota Pedralba, as well as best friends she has some enemies. Laura, Adriana and me (Mar¨ªa) love being a little cheeky, in a good way. She is sometimes mean to people if you are not her friend, but normally she is VERY kind. Adriana doesn't like sleeping, that is one of the common things I have with her. One of her favorite things to do is drawing, she has lots and lots of special pens, crayons, highlighters, paint.... AS you see, she is an artist at drawing. She says she isn't good at math, even though she likes them. So... This is Adriana and some things about her.
My favorite sports are cycling and swimming.

Swimming is very excited. Although you don¡¯t know how to swim, you would love it. In Hong Kong, it is very hot in summer. There are many swimming pools in Hong Kong, people love to swim with their families, friends or their children. 

People in Hong Kong love to go cycling in holidays, too. Some people used to do cycling as relaxing. People like cycling alone in the river.

Doing sport is very important in our lives. We need to do more sports to make us healthy.

Hello!
I am Alexander Sokolov. I¡¯m going to visit your hotel from June,6 to June, 24
But I have a serious problem - I am allergic to animal hair. 
So would you please reserve a room for me where no animals have lived before?
Best regards, Alexander Sokolov
Dear Gareth,
I can't go to a barbecue next Sunday because I'm going to Seville with my parents, and I'm coming back so late.
I think that we can meet on Saturday evening at the caf¨¦. What do you think about it?
Love, 
Alicia
The last mistake that I have had to have been when I changed the telephone company because since I changed I have many troubles. All company are the same, any solve your problems. I have had to put a claim because the company didn't resolve. After a month, I didn't know when I will receive my telephone. 
All this began because the first telephone that I received It was faulty. The company had to send me an other telephone, this telephone turned out to faulty also. Since that moment all have been problems. Now, I have to wait an answer to the company.
My favorite sport is handball. I play it every day for 4 class. 
I really like it because this is not a game in which You only play of ball.
This is really exciting and amazing. I feel happy when I play it. 
In this game you must play with team. You mustn't play only,, but you must with team.
My first match of handball was in 5 class. I remember, because then We won.
On starting, I was really bring, and I want to stop played. By when I understand how much happy give me this game, I was starting more running and train. Training Trever said me that I'm perfect. These words did that I was starting to more
believe in yourself. If You'd like to try play in Handball, You must know that first time is always the worst. But You mustn't 
not believe in yourself. This is my advice for everyone who like to play in every game.


Before starting talking about the members of my family and if they are my best friends or not, I just want to say that my family is the most thing I love in my life, I respect them appreciate them also, and I think they are the best thing in my life.
The most family member I love and think she is the best friend of mine, my sister, she is elder me about 12 years, I can tell her anything about my life, my self, my feelings, HHH also I think if I felt in love she would be the first to know that.
About my rest of family, as I said before they are just a relative, but even if they are not friends almost, but I do love them too much, first one is my aunt, the dead one, and the other who still alive, but I don't feel that felling of love towards my uncle, I do love him, but he is just my uncle no more.
At last, I wanna talk about my cousins, I love the most of them especially the cousin in the same age, they are my friends, I love too much, and also the rest of my family 
I would like to inform about recorrection of my family name in the result sheet. I have already checked my family name with student service on last friday, 20 november. My family name is WONGWATJANAKUL, but the result sheet is WONGWATJANAKAKUL that it is an incorrect. Could you please recorrection of my family name? If you have further questions, please feel free to contact me. I would be grateful if you will let me know as soon as possible.
 The sport is very important of our body it has many benefits to improve our selves and give us self confidant, so we should practice any sport we love because it can change our mind to the better.  
          
 A bout me I like playing Holly ball and I enjoy the sport when I play it because of being useful for my body.
 
              Looking for any sport make you feel good, and your brain be always refresh so that you can begin your day with any sport to making fresh and after that you can make any job with refreshment mind. 
  
 The benefits of any sport make your healthy good, so we can do it, just make exercise every morning to make your blood pressure run in all your body.
He is an athletic runner that has imposed a new global record, nobody believes in him not media either his own father in him. When he was just about cursing the final line he got hurt and his mussels was dying and star to peel off a black matter, at that point the guys in suit thought that he won¡¯t be able to cross the line, but when they saw that he kept running, they freeze the time and run after him, he stopped for a moment but then, he starts running again and when he cross the line he woke up in a red somber fluid, he was wiped out from the matrix, he opened his eyes and saw a flying robot, suddenly he was on a wood wheelchair, and they said that he would never be able to walk again, besides that, he stands up and tried to walk again.
My favorite sport is basketball. I like this game very much .it is a very useful game .it helps me to keep fit.I play basketball many years ago.I want to be a very famous basketball player. Basketball needs that the person should be tall enough to play it.I like basketball because it makes me happy, fit,have self_confidence and makes me active .if anyone wants to play basketball, he should do many exercises and try to be able to play it because everything is difficult at first, but we shouldn't give up.
Julia¡¯s anecdote is not a fact, but a fiction. It¡¯s a bookseller called ¡°A dog the obedience¡± that the author is Brazilian.
The story is about five friends that begin to investigate a drug traffic happening inside at school. However, one friend disappears then the four friends decided to discover where is him. 
 It¡¯s a mystery story with a moral, because for surprise of reader, the director was the drug dealer that produced the drug inside the classes. The moral is about the students, don¡¯t be na?ve and take care of unscrupulous men that sell drugs.

Hi Jo!

I heard you will come to my country. I am writing to you to give you some advice about work and travel in my country.
In Pole we have a lot of interesting places to visit. Places that you can visit : mountains, see and lakes. We have a lot of nice old town. Polen is an amazing and interesting country. If you have working in Pole, the best way is job on holiday. If you have experience in cook, you will be the right person for this job. Hope you come soon.
 See you!
Love!
LyX
I have a dream to continue my study until PhD. However, I think that it is not an easy thing to be achieved because of the limitation about information of scholarship. In addition, I work as civil servant who should follow the government rule. Actually, I don't give up and always looking for the opportunities. In my opinion, education is a way to improve our life quality. In other words, it can change our paradigm and mindset also into better perspectives. In the broader capacity, it can help my nation's position from the world perspective. Therefore, I do not try to erase my ambition. Everything is possible as long as we have effort.
Travelling is an essential in everybody's life. Although the number of cars are increasing day by day, however most of the people traveled through the public transport. Their limited income restricts them to buy cars. Also the main drawback of cars is the environmental pollution. Therefore, public transport has its own importance. In order to avoid the environmental pollution, people should use the public transport that will not only help to reduce the pollution but also the extra expenditures for the petrol. Government should focus on the improvement of public transport and must discourage the individual cars.  
Hi Richard, 

Thank you for your money. I¡¯m going to buy a DVD from ¡®Frozen¡¯. I chose this movie because it is my favorite cartoon and I can watch with my children. 

Take the best care. 

Lorena


Dear Peter, 

Thanks for your letter asking about the wedding. It¡¯s always great to hear from you, and I hope that everything is going well. 

In my country, the weddings are celebrated from Spring to Autumn.  People wear special dress. If the wedding is in the morning women wear short dress, on the contrary if the wedding is in the afternoon, women wear long dress. The food is varied. You can have several dishes such as fish, meat, seafood and a large cake. 

I hope that¡¯s useful. By the way, if you need anything else, you know where I am, and I really mean it. 

I¡¯m looking forward to hearing from you. 

Bye for now, 

Lorena


Bye for now,

Lorena

Hello Jo.
Good, I am going to throw a hand. My advice to travel for Spain is that there are several types of transport, but the most economic is the public, most expensive transport can be the taxi, for example. But, you can travel by plane, it is not very expensive.
My advice of finding work, does a bit complicate because nowadays, there are a lot of people without work. But you can be lucky because the summer is very near and the work increase.  Your you can find work, since you have the learned English, in a bar, in a hotel, etc.
Well, I wish the best thing to you and that you find work. Good luck

By David.
I woke up knowing it was the most important day of my life. I expected that day during long time, it was my wedding¡äs day. In the sprinter, he proposed to me in C¨®rdoba, so I accepted excited. We had a long love story. I met with my boyfriend 5 years ago,, so I was sure that it was the most important day of my life. I wore a beautiful dress and I well brushed. It was an excited day, all my friends, family¡­were with me. My boyfriend become in my husband. He was very beautiful, and he sang a magnetic song for me. Actually, he is a good husband, and I¡äm sure that he love me so much.
Dear Sir,

I'm writing this letter to tell you about my work last summer at my local cinema.

I liked my work there so much. My work was about reserving tickets for the customers. It seemed like a simple job to me, but it was also a very stressful job at rush times. In the morning, we had small groups of people and the rush times started in the evening. 



I am looking forward to hearing from you about how did you spend your summer.

Sincerely,
Gehad 
Hi, My name is Gabriela Cordero Magallanes ... I are thirteen years old. I like playing games and read. Furthermore, I'm from Brazil. My best friend is Jennifer Giordano, she's Pretty and Smart. 
I used all the things except two. I didn't have the Internet when I was a child. And also we couldn't choose programs. I played in the street and walked to school alone. I'm thinking what kind if things were more dangerous for me? It was so dangerous when my friends and I swam in the Tool river. We jumped into the water and caught crayfish. When I remember that moment, I am exciting. I guess every child want to investigate the world. We have to help them, to show and explain. What kind of risks they can get if to do that.
 Nuclear energy is one of most important source to generate energy and heat for the people in the world. The countries diurnal attempts to develop the industry of nuclear to produce more power.
 There are many views of using the nuclear power. Some people guess the nuclear power has a great value to produce power instead of the fossil fuels such as : coals and oil which are Not renewable energy. Moreover, they think that controlling the pollution is possible.
 Whereas. The serious side of the nuclear power is the dangerous weapons that the countries try to own, threat to peace in the world. These kinds of weapons do not kill one or ten but destroy a large town completely.
 In my opinion, using the nuclear power is important with the great development in the humans' life. The countries have to establish this energy and other sources to secure the power for people.  
Hi Lucy,
How are you? 
I am writing to tell you about something that for sure you will love it.
Yesterday I was surfed the Internet and find on an amazing site www.bargainstime.com
It was really by chance. I saw a colorful pop-up ad and I decided to check it.
I was in shock. There were so many trendy clothes in attractive prices.
Immediately, I have gone shopping there. I bought a skinny blue jean and black tight dress.
The material is of good quality and the clothes look the same as on the page.
This is on the big plus, but the waiting time for delivery is quite long.
I know that you are looking for a wedding dresses and I saw a lot of wonderful items on this page.
I think you will like it just as me. 
I hope it will helps you.
See you soon,
Martina
In 2009, Michel lived in New York with his girlfriend, Ann, in their apartment. 
He worked a lot, arrived late of his work and never has time to be with Ann. 
But they were lovely, and they decided that get married in 2010. 
Was everything organized. Ann decided that she'll experiment her dress of marriage
in her apartment while Michel was working. There is a history that the man can't to see
his woman before the date of wedding. 
Michel arrived more early in his home this day, and when his open his home door, he saw 
Ann dressed in her wedding dress. Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
The fastest option to go on holidays

My favorite way to travel is by plane because you are quickly in another country. By play you rarely have problems with your luggage. By train, you didn't will have always place for your luggage. By plane, you can give your luggage at the check-in, or you can take the hand luggage with you. You can be always sure that you will find a place for your luggage. 

Another reason why travel by plane is my favorite is because it is more comfortable to sleep except you have a loud person close to you. That can be annoy and. I think travel by boat is one of the baddest ways to travel when you are seasick. Then you must travel by train or by plane.

BIG FISH, A VERY GOOD RESTAURANT WHOSE Specialty IS "TAPAS"
Eating "tapas" is a very popular way of having a meal in Spain. If you are not very hungry. You can eat small pieces of different dishes and to have dinner or lunch inexpensively.
For more than thirty year in Era has been opened every day "Big Fish" a traditional restaurant with a typical cook of the coast of M¨¢laga.
With your drink, the first portion is on the house. If you pay between one and three euros, you can choose little dishes of fresh fish and different types of salads. The portion of prawns is very famous as octopus salad, which is known by everyone.
The service is very organized and fast, although it might be in high season you would not have to wait a long time.
This restaurant only has a little problem. You can eat "tapas" at the counter or in small tables near the bar. The rest of the dining room is exclusive by eating meals.

Discussions about genetic manipulation become strong when a specific area is mentioned: genetically modified food or GM food.  For several decades, the population has been discussing arguments for and against GM food.  Improve human nutrition and agriculture conditions are arguments of those who are in favor of manipulation.
In the first quarter, we can see that sales rose, in the second quarter, sales went up but in the third quarter, sales were unchanged. In conclusion, we can see that sales went up every time except the third quarter that it were unchanged. This is good, because sales never went down. 
My favorite sport is football, I love it. It is the most popular sport in the world. I enjoy to play it, particularly because it is a competitive sport and because you play for a team and not alone, and this for me is really important. The thing I like best in football is play it, but I also like watching it, intact I am a fan of the team Lazio. Some people think that the football is a bad thing because the footballer are all stupid, and the fans are all violent and disrespectful, but it isn't like it. Ok there are some fans who aren't good people, but the most important associations of football are trying to stop they and to abolish all bad things in football.
For all the people I advise to start to play or watching football because for me, it is a very good sport, but you can play a good football only if you really like it, because first football is fun.
As every year the twenty-three of April, day of book, in my school all the student of fifth and sixth of primary do short story competition and the winner have a gift. The gifts are usually a book and a ticket for the theme park in Madrid, and the children who have participated win a book.
Always the director of my school, called Michael, is who organizes this event as that the children have fun writing his shorts stories. But this year, Michael is organizes very evil because he doesn¡ät enough books for all children and a lot of they hadn¡ät gift, so Michel had closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
Pain and gain 

This movie is bases quote on a "true story" buts obviously director Michael Bay known for the transformers franchise puts a lot of Hollywood into this movie, it's about a bodybuilder named Daniel Lugo who decides to kidnap a rich guy and make him sign away all of his properties, which obviously it's not a great plan that backfires on him, and eventually police get him.
It's a great funny movie, especially for someone like me who enjoys going to the gym and lifting some weights.


Hi Julie,
thank you for your present. I love the T-shirt that you gave me for my birthday. It is a very beautiful T because -shirt, I like the color and the pattern.
 My day in London
I went to London in April. It was pretty warm. My family and I got a great feeling as we landed in London.
We saw a lot of sights like the Big Ben, which is the biggest clock in the world, and the London Eye. To got to the Big Ben we took the underground, but to get to the London Eye a red bus. After 3 days we went home. I forgot to tell you something about homeless people. A lot of people are homeless, which is sad, but maybe we can change it. 
Sport is very important for every one. Old and young are benefit from sports. My favorite sport is volleyball.  
I like it very much. I practice it in the club. Furthermore, I play it with my companions. It makes my body healthy and strong.
When you score a lot of points, you will win the match. Generally sports is growing our mind continuously. I practice it with my friends. I enjoy playing it alone or with my friends. My parents always support me to play what like and 
enjoy. It makes me lose weight easily without doing any effort. I don't find any difficulty in doing it.  
My favorite sport is basketball. Usually I only play basketball in school. We play by teams or each one alone. Of course, we don't have 2 million balls for each student, no we share with each other. Also, not all the school play at one time, on every section have time to play in. In school, I always play with friends, never played alone and always my friends and I win. Last time I played when won 14 by 5. Do you know do I enjoy my sport, I will tell you why because when you play you have fun and interested? My advice for people who are starting this sport is to repeat playing until they get it.
My favorite soap opera is "Friends". I remember to watching it at home at the age of twelve and laughing out loss with my brother. I still watch it on Saturdays and I really enjoy it! 
My favorite character is Joey, who is a silly, innocent man. He live with Chandler, opposite Monica and Rachel¡¯s flat.

It is very difficult to deny the importance of family in our life, definitely families play an essential role in community structure. According to the experts we can't create successful society without creative families, and one another specific part of your life is a good partner surrounding your daily activities. 
One of the main advantage of family is the recognition you have been given in specific age, children required special attention to grow up well, and that can only be given by family. For instance, homeless children are more likely to fail in their education, job and adapt to society. Consequently, they probably fail to experience from their live.
Moreover, families take an essential part in protect their members from bad atmosphere, and it probably reflects on their performance toward country.leading to effective, creative and useful civilians. 
The last film I each was "the orders" by it is a horror / suspense movie, I was really scared.
It is about a family (the mother and her two children Nicholas and Anne), the mother is crazy and thinks her children are allergic to the lighting general. So the didn`t come outside in the day, and in a room it could not be more than a candle at a time, it had to be always dark in the house.
Strange things happen in the house, they are "intruders" in the house, Anne saw many times someone called victor who "play`s"
and the mother thinks she is lying but after a while she believes her and started searching for the intruders.
At the end, the intruders turn out to be ghosts that 
yes because yes
fsdjgdofg
Public transportation

I think nowadays it is more common that people use their car for their normal activities, but the statement that there IR no future for public transportation it is not completely true, I think that a lot of people use public transportation because it is cheaper, and some people don't have enough money to buy a car.

Another reason is that here in Mexico, in some cities you can't use your car in specific days, so if you do not have another car, you have to use public transportation.


Well, my college has been provided an organization called Enacts. I'm a member on it and its goal that improve the positivity of our society by setting projects serves many people who really needs our help. So, we have actually done 8 projects since I came in and I had a good feeling through helping other people. We interned 2 national Competitions in 2 years and won second place on one of our projects and gained 2 leagues on other ones. We made our university proud plus helping people. Now, we are over 180 members in this organization and getting increase. We need more of this organization cross the world, and there are a lot of students ready for help and wishing for a chance to make our society a better place. 
I studied in Kuwait schools, after that I joined Damascus university, the faculty of human medicine, I graduated from it in 2008 with very good grade, then I got the Master's degree in laboratory medicine from the same university (Ministry of Higher Education) in 2013 with Excellent grade. Then I returned to Kuwait, to set at home till I find work or may get a chance to continue my higher education (doctorate) ....
Now I'm working in voluntary works, like translation, editing in Wikipedia & others
This premonition cannot hold more true. Traveling in public transport can be cumbersome and quite eventful. 
Talk of getting to meet strangers who may turn out to be thieves. That is why I feel traveling by your own car is the best things that can happen to one person.
You get the convenience of traveling at your own pace and stopping when you please.
Someone has suggested putting warnings on some types of food and drink. This suggestion is controversial. On the one hand, society become increasingly fat and kinds of warnings could be useful to remind them to eat clean. On the other hand, it's hard to implement this idea. The companies who produce products with harmful ingredients are very mighty so that this suggestion is very hard to enforce. The example on cigarette packets shows that warnings like this could be useful.
The aim of this report is to provide assessment to relocate the current canteen of the campus to a location more accessible for all the students, hence it will hopefully prove both, the profitability of the canteen and the relevant role it plays for all the students in the campus. 
One day, a man called Jonas was standing in front of a mountain when he saw a big bird of prey. He was worried that the bird charged him, so the man seeks refuge and goes in a cavern.
Suddenly he understands that he has heard a noise,, so he decides to stay in the cavern away from danger. It's the day after, and Jonas has put up all night in the cavern and at cold. At dawn, the man goes out from the cavern and look at the sky to see if there was the bird of prey. Jonas doesn't see the bird and think that the predatory had gone away, during the night. So he decides to get home. While the man was climbing the mountain, the bird pecked at Jonas, who, worried, didn't know what to do. He decided to take the penknife that he had in his bag, and he is successful in kill the bird of prey. After two long day, Jonas get home safe and sound and tell everything about his experience.


As all of us know that today's generation prefers everything to be their own. An in the process of owning we have moving so ahead that a day will be there when we will strongly claim that public transport does not have any future. It will automatically diminish its presence. As our country is developing, there will days were each and every individual will be self-reliant and would definitely prefer having their own vehicle to commute from one distance to the other. 
In 1999, they're some college friends went to desert in their Holley, they have a camping to get a fun. But in some day tow guise with quad bike, and they saw something wrong they said what's that, they sow dead body, they shared and run to the camp. Other friends coll poles. Poles came with big investigation. The investigation accuse them and investigate prison. 
after two days poles sow some body in crime scene the poles man ask them what did you do hear ? He was shard and puzzle over. They cache them. After two days he was confessed. The poles man WHS sham from the goes, and he was apologized.  
Television serves the multipurpose of entertaining and educating people.in order to cope up in the competition world and get recognized in the cooperative world, one must strive hard, which in turn increases their stress levels. Television has become one of the means to reduce the stress levels. Besides providing entertainment, television has also become a source of information.
Dear Sir or Madam,
I apply to your University, and I am still waiting for an answer. Also, I am not get an invitation to an interview yet. The problem is that I am from Poland and I could be in Great Britain from 22 to 25 February. I am sorry if I do not understand in your previous e-mails. 
I am waiting for your answer. 
Yours sincerely
Well, I'm Sebastian Vega, and I'm studying engineering sustainable development. One of the things that I feel stressed are the finals exams, because I have to study for all the classes, and sometimes I am very confused with my notes. To be honest I take the finals exams like a challenge, and it becomes exciting for me and I think I learn a lot if I have pressure and the most of the time I have good grade. Sometimes I trust a lot and I have a bad grades, so I feel depressed.
 Nowadays, the public transport isn't hardly necessary for our life. However,a lot of cities have a problem about traffic, cause of this trouble that citizen don't use public transport such as autobus, taxi, or even metro. Consequently, gorvernment start to support and take care of the public transport. Moreover, it's not only traffic's problem but also bad condition. Much toxic and exhaust flow to air.

 How can we recover the public transport. People are unpleasant because all of them have bad quality, so government ought to update new technology which protects the environment.
 
  Now, the car price is very low's cost so it is very easy to buy a car. The recent years before, a family had only one car, but today we have a car for ourselves.
 

Restaurant review
This restaurant is excellent! It's not very expensive and there are lots of choices on the menu. Waiters are always smiling and they are very nice. They wear black and white clothing, like the decoration of the establishment. It is located in the city center next to a big fountain. They open from 11 am to 14 pm and from 8 pm to 10pm. And for spring and summer they open a beautiful and large terrace. The atmosphere is very friendly. The food is excellent and copious. The baking of the meat is excellent. The wait is not long, only a few minutes. This restaurant should be the best for our class.

The best place for young people in our area is without doubt the countryside with the lake.
Here they can do many kinds of sport: swimming, sailing, surfing, kiting, rowing and many others. 
At least they can meet other folks and relax, have a sunbathed and listen to the music.
In the summer around the lake are so many concerts, so you have the difficulty finding the right one.
Luckily, the souls are closed per ten weeks, so the young girls and boys have much time to spend the
leisure time together.  
 In modern day there is very little public transport are used, ganeral public prefer much faster and convenience ways of traveling around. Though the public transport are used in maker cities to avoid traffic confusion, it is wildly recognize that public transport are eco-friendly.
Public transport is used by many people around the world, including me. Some public transports as trains do not contaminate as cars or motorbikes. Many people said that public transport is not comfortable, that's true, from my point of view bus is not so uncomfortable. Many people like going by car, but it pollutes a lot more than going by public transport. Public transport is cheaper than buying a car or motorbike, it also contaminate less than these. Public transport is also used by children's like me who want to go to school, high school or to the university.
Finally, I think public transport has a very good future, because it has very good advantages but also some little disadvantages, it's also very useful for some people. In my opinion, public transport couldn't disappear.
I like to spend time in cute little kids, and cooking is my favorite hobby. In the evening, I would like to spend some time with those kids by organizing some indoor and outdoor games for them. I would feel more energetic throughout the day If I have some busy or tight scheduled work, I have come across your advertisement For this job and I really think that I would suit this job in every aspect because I have a friendly move with people in and around me. I would be pleased to know for your positive reply.
My town tries to take care of the environment,, but sometimes it is not possible. Some people don't have any conscience of the need of good environment. Neither, they don't seem to take care of nature and all around it. For instance, My town have a lot of mountains with big forests, tall trees and many types of animals or plants. However, that isn't protected by government and its institutions. Local Parliament haven't regulated principles or rules of the environment, then ecosystems have been destroyed, rivers are contaminated and pollution had based inside my town. 
Besides, my town's institutions have allowed that some foreign enterprises or corporations could to take our own resources without demand that they be careful with environment. This is clearly a symptom of how inside my town doesn't care any element of the environment. 
Nevertheless, in the last decade some neighborhoods have taken conscience on their context. In this way, we can to see inside them that their population have so much control, and they know that affect them. Good management of the rubbish is a new inclination in many neighborhoods of my town. Recycle plastic, paper, cardboard etc., by oblation of the most important neighborhoods of my town is a way to improve the environment. 
My favorite sport is box because it's the only sport that can relax me. In my opinion, this sport teaches maturing because in addition to set up the person physically, it instructs the mind. I begin this sport for 2 years ago. My brother was won so much fight and when I saw him proud I want to try that. I don't know what I can tell. Thank you goodbye.
Must people prefer large colleges more than small colleges for many advantages. First, the majors offer numerous and diverse. It has a lot of faculty members. It gives the students the freedom to choose his major and the teachers. In addition, it has a lot of facilities that serve students like kindergarten that takes care of children of these employees, university housing, hospital the student of medicine can be application in it, and it serves the people too, and a big library has many books in various languages. Besides that it availability some services like transporting for students and faculty, some restaurants, and mini market. In addition, the location of large college is clear and the center of the city, so that easily accessible. In the end, large colleges admit the largest number of students, so the student may do establishing friendships more from different nationalities, also it serves the community by graduating many students in various majors.
 Once upon a time there was a boy, his name is Michael. He had a very beautiful brown hair, Green eyes, and perfect smile. Michael loves to play football all the time. Someday he woke up early at the morning he goes out for playing football before school, when he's playing he saw something running very fast and go away. He's back home for getting ready for school when he's try to forget what he saw, but he can't. After school, he didn't go to his home directly to check if what he saw at the morning was real or not, but he didn't find anything. Next day he woke up early too, not to play football but to take a look if this stranger will come back this morning. And he saw it again. He jumps from his bed to the street and walk to his way to see what he did every morning. When he walks after the stranger man he notices that he stopped in every trash in the street to take a look and go to the next one, and guess what he saw Michael and run away also Michael was afraid. The stranger was looking for food in the street to take it to his family.
Hi Michael,
 I just got back from a school trip to London. It was very cool. We visited the Tower of London, Buckingham Palace and the wax museum. I liked the most in a wax museum. He puts them on Marie Tussaud in 1835. There are statues of famous people from different walks of life made of wax. When you were last on a school trip? Where it was and what you have seen?
Hello John

 Thank you for showing interest in being a part of our company. The organization has reached its current position, because of people like you. We would like to give six months time to scale up your skills. We are looking forward to seeing your participation in the Organization after six months.
My favorite sport is basketball. I like it very much. Almost each weekend, I'll go to the playground to play basketball with my classmates. And that's my happiest time. Furthermore, I watch TV of NBA matches each day. I am quite interested with how the stars are going on.
Insufficient ESP teaching skills made teachers pull back to general English. This becomes the concern of the employers since it may impact on the students¡¯ learning outcomes. This should also become the ED UMM commitment. 
FILM: LUCY (2014)


The plot of this film is about a 25 naive woman that was living and studying in Taiwan and one night went out for clubbing and met a nutter guy that involved her in a seedy drug smuggling issue with a Korean criminal band that forced her to be a mule of drug. 

A new substance, called CPH4, bound to be distributed around Europe and the United States by which plenty bag was set into her stomach having an illegal clinical surgery. But everything became out of control for the criminals when one of her captors kicked on her abdomen, the substance spills through her body, and she begins to experience a different state of consciousness in which she dizzily enhanced her IQ from 2% to almost 100% of his capacity. During this time she contacts Samuel Norma, PhD Professor of University, to ask him what happens if a person reaches the 100% of his mental activity or IQ. She¡äll end up knowing the answer.
It is a gripping film, starring by Scarlett Johanson and Morgan Freeman in a quite good playing, that will you keep tense until the last scene and doesn¡ät leave you feel unfeasible.

Nowadays, people are using own cars instead of public transport, this effect is more obvious in big cities where the price of public transport cost more than small cities. People are getting used to drive with their own car, it provides more conformability, and is more practical. You can use it whenever you want, and it's not necessary to make a long queues at metro or bus stations.

The government are opposing to invest in public infrastructures, because the benefits are lower every year. They are preferring to invest in public roads and motorways.


The impact of this fact has a huge consequence in the climate effect, in the future the global pollution will increase according to the level of the cars. 
The travelling by car, it's very bad. 

With the public transport, we protected the environment. 

The pollutes, it's a global problem. If we travel by car, have more pollutes that with public transport. 

Otherwise, the public transport pollutes less that the car but the car it's very comfortable and not be hour hard. With the car, I feel more free as I don't depend on other people to move to the site.

I believe that in the future all transport will be with the public transport or least with massive transport.

The actual system is not possible to stand long time.

Recently I saw the trailer of the film about vampires. The film is called 'The Vampire Diaries'. It is about two men and one woman. The girl is 18 years old and men (as it later turns out) are vampires, and they have over 100 years. One of the vampires decides to return to high school. There he meets a girl. He falls in love in her. They are together. Then there is the older brother of the boy (vampire) and also falls in love in her. All the action takes place in Mystic Falls. This trailer I like, and I think that the film would be cool. 
Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately. He had to buy a present for his girlfriend¡äs birthday, but it was Sunday and all stores were closed, so he had to found a solution. A few hours, he was walking by a garden, and suddenly, he saw the most beautiful flowers that he has ever seen, so he picked them up. However, flowers weren¡ät enough, so he decided to think in anything else. Several hours later, he found an open sweet shop, and he bought some bonbons for her. Finally, he had found the present and before the end of the day he ran quickly to his girlfriend's house. If you don't want to pass this situation, you must always do things with time.
In my thoughts, I have the opinion the public transport is better to the environment because going in the public transport reduce the CO2 emissions and take out traffic from the streets. 

Reducing the rush hours in the main hours cause a CO2 reduction in the air.  It is a true statement about cars, travelling by car is so much more convenient and the new technologies apply to the 
People should take less fast food and do regular exercises for maintaining a healthy life. People tend to pick the junk foods as they do not get enough time for cooking at home. Many of us do not get enough time, in the morning, to prepare our lunch for the office. Easy availability is also tempting us for fast foods. University education is good for the students,, but they also need to learn industry specific skills. Students, for example, learn many theories, which may not be required at their place of work. New skills like analytics and data management are in demand. In my opinion, what is expected is a new role for teachers but not their disappearance from classrooms. At university level, availability of IT training, software and manuals provide an ever accessible source of information, that otherwise would not be at hand. For example, India has high rate of unemployment, hunger, poverty which leads to an immense embarrassment of being Indian. 
Nowadays, internet represents the whole knowledge that people have collected over the centuries. So it provides a lot of interesting information, one of which are about how works different machines, what can be found at www.howstuffworks.com. Also, 'internet' in our days helps to get information all over the world, and if you wish to get involved then go to the www.bbc.co.uk. These sites are a free way to find most adequate information about actual events both in society and technical life.
One day I decide to buy newspaper. When I was arrived at home, I was started to read the newspaper, so I found from there The International Student Magazine have to organize a short story competition, and I decide to call Michael to tell him about this contest.
Michael was told me he was known about this contest and at that moment he wants to call me to ask if I am able to came with him at that contest. After I decided to go with him at the contest, I was thinking to go at that contest next year to participate and win that contest, so this year I was wondering how is the program. 
When we were arrived there, the emotions started to appear, so definitely it was time to drink a hot coffee, before the contest is started. I was wondering if Michael pass that exam. 
I was waiting for Michael less than an hour, so I started to have a lot of emotions. 
After Michael was opened the door from the classroom, I was sawed in his eyes something strange. 
Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake. 
Recently, an increasing number of people try to travel by car for convenient. In my opinion, public transport will still exist in the society. There are three main reasons for supporting my idea. Firstly, for the long-distance, the car is not as convenient as airport. For example, if you go to another city by car, you may spend more than two days on the way. On the contrary, airport just cost you two hours, and you can go to your destination. The time spending of taking airport is lower than taking care. Secondly, consuming car is not a normal thing for part of developing or undeveloped country. The fee of buying car and fuel oil is expensive for poor people. Thus, it is important to use public transport because it is much cheaper than private car, and everyone can consume. Thirdly, the global warming is a serious issue for human who live in the earth. Air pollution is the main causes for global warming. The great number of using private car leads to higher level of air pollution, and the public transport is one of the best solutions for decreasing the air pollution. To sum up, there are numerous benefits to use public transport, and it will not disappear. 
I agree that comm uniting by car is easier and faster than most of the public transportation; however, there are serious problems come after it; the amount of vehicles on the roads keep increase and make congestion and pollution which are far more severe than the inconvenience causing by public transportation. Thus, I think the future for public transportation will be more prosperous.
Dear Jo
Many thanks for your message,
when you can, you call me. Then, if you want we could go to the restaurant of the city
later if you want we could find a job for three months, in my opinion a good job for three months I could be the waiter because the waiter get much money in the three months of the summer.
Also I believe that a good job could be lifeguarded, because in summer the people go to the beach, and they need lifeguard. If I were you, I would choose lifeguard because the lifeguard earn much money than the waiters.
If you want we could go to the capital city of my country, we will go by the car because the car is cheaper than the bus or train, we could eat in the famous restaurant of the city, or we could go to the cinema also if you want I could visit the medieval wall.
I am looking forward to seeing you
best wishes

Toni
Mobile phones are the most important thing in our daily lifers the most effective method for instantaneous communication.However, the extensive use of mobiles create a lot of problems. This essay evaluates whether its demerits outweigh its merits.
To begin with nowadays people are addicted to mobiles. For example young people wasting their valuable time in mobiles.Moreover, their concentration is reduced.
Another serious problem is people are creating relationships with an unknown person and can lead to several issues including crimes.
To sum up, let people aware about the drawbacks of phones and use it wisely.
Uncertain future for Public Transport
Public transport is generally is the transport system provided by government for the general people. These transport includes buses, trains & boats etc. People of all classes can use this. This facility helps the general people in saving their money because usually this transport are the less costly. 
My favorite kind of sport is horse riding. The first time when I ride on the horse I was 14 and since that time I enjoy it very much. When I ride on the horse, I feel myself much better and forget all of my problems. Riding the horse gives me a state of freedom. I think that the horse is a kind and clever animal. If you want to start to ride on a horse, the main thing that you should know is "don't be afraid of horses!" They feel your fear.
Alcoholism is a disease that affects many people in the world today. I think that is an important illness because it affects the family of alcoholic people. Moreover, the alcoholics should go to the doctor in order to get well. In conclusion, alcoholism is a serious problem for all the society.
I'm a big fan of science fiction movies, however this kind of movies is actually sometimes a little bad, but in the last weeks a new one has been released, and I was absolutely surprised about this one. Interstellar is a new Christopher Nolan's movie which includes the participation of some Hollywood's stars such as Matthew McConaughey, Anne Hathaway and Matt Damon.
Public transport has a big role in transportation specially in large cities like Capital city of countries, using the car sometimes causes traffic jam if all person uses their own car, to avoid this a good roadway is needed, also the cost of public transportation is lower than private transportation.

On the other hand, public transportation takes more time to get to the required station, because already public transport taking long path to go across more places and as much as peoples take benefits from it, and public transport usually crowed and do not be on time.
For that reason, using own car is more comfortable than public transport, you can travel when ever you like and where ever you want.

Finally, in the near future most peoples will be using their own car, because it saves much time as comparing with public transport and time factor will be more expensive in the future.
On school days, I get up at 5 a.m. and go jogging in my neighborhood in 15 minutes. Then I take a shower, have breakfast with my family members. Everyone is in a hurry. I leave home at 7:30 to take a school bus. 
After school, I keep running on a track field to be an athlete on a school sports team. In the rainy season, it is boring to do rehearsals as nobody is on the field.
I come back home on the sunset. Sometimes, I am exhausted due to a hard workout. However, I can't go to bed early because I have to prepare my homework for tomorrow's school. 

My favorite day it is Saturday because I do not need to work or study, so I can go out with my friends and on Sunday I can wake up very late

write soon,

Dog
My favorite sport is basketball. It is an amazing sport. When I jump to throw the ball in the basket, I feel that I am flying. When I ran with the ball, I feel that I hold a goal or a valuable something and I should offer my best to put it in his place and make it in the right way . I know that I am not professional player and I amn't belonged to any team but I like this game.basketball is so simple play, but it is need Speed, concentration and The ability to determine the distances , it contains of two team of five players and each team try to get a high point by throwing the ball through the basket.
 What I like most in this game is that The fewest number of player can play it even two players, I recommend everyone to exert it especially with their friends or families,
In this episode of my life, I will to talk you about my daily routine. I wake up early like 7 am, at this moment go out to the backyard to turn on the boiler, then go to kitchen
Nowadays, people live in very modern and fast society and try to have as convenient life as it is possible. One of the many possibilities, how do our lives more convenient, is to use cars rather than public transport.

Firstly, I like to mentioned public transport¡äs types. The most common are bus and train, but in the cities people can use tram, subway or boat and for the long distance they can take a flight. 

From my point of view, the main transport disadvantages, which caused our lives discomfort are time and place limitation, sharing the space with others, lack of free seat. 

On the other hand, people should think of the environment, pollution, global warming, which all are currently warning. We should think of our better future and try to behave environmentally friendly - try to avoid the huge pollution, which is by cars caused and don¡ät think only to our comfort.

 
On my birthday's day, I directed to go to school this morning. I wonder whether my birthday passed it at lunchtime. At this point, someone invites to sing to me, after school, he / she and I went to dinner and went to sing. To the KTV, they touched to me because there are a lot of people had planned a birthday celebrate to me together. After finish to the home, due to I was so tired that I fell asleep and fell down. The next day, I was reluctanted to rise and class. Suddenly, I thought of my gift was gone in the class, the students said he / she didn't take, but I doubt them, so we quarrel. I came home from school, only to found a gift on the sofa. Offer an apology out of harm students, but fortunately he didn't get angry for me. 
It is easy to make boiled egg. There are four steps to boil an egg and some tips to make it delicious. Here you are the recipe: First, bring some materials like: a pan, water, one or more eggs, and sure a stove. Second, pour the hot water and eggs into the pan. Third, let them boil on the stove for ten minutes. Fourth, take the eggs out and let them cool for about five minutes. Finally, to make it delicious there are some tips: if you like, you can put a little salt and pepper on it. That is how to boil an egg. 
Hi Peter! Personally, I agree with your parents. I think you should save money for the future, because you may have to buy something important with your own money. In my opinion, there are more important things than computer games, so spending money for them, it's like wasting money. In the future you'll have to spend a lot of money for the university, the new home and so on, and I think you should start saving money. I should do it too,, but it's not simple, actually. Everything seems so beautiful in the shops! Silvia.
Actually, where I live the public transport is highly used, It seems that in the near future they won't disappear. In fact, in some countries overdeveloped may will extinguish because I suppose travelling by car is much cheaper and faster. But, that future is very far for our actual situation. 
Collecting book is my favorite pastime. I started my hobby when I was a child. The first item in my collection is an ABC book. And now, I have a lot of books of all kinds: biology, chemistry, novel, dictionary, etc. Now I have about 100 and more in the future, I hope that. Whenever I find an interesting book, I buy it immediately. Sometimes, my family and my friends gives me book such gifts. I classify them into different categories: manual, cookbook, biography, etc. It takes all my spare time to clean and dust. It keeps me amused for hours, too.
This is the first text I would like to write on this website. I think this is a good idea to contribute to English language research and improve my skill at the same time. As this is my first time, I would like to find out how exactly does the system work, so I chose to write this random text rather than those serious topics available.
Public transport is more convenient than cars, in many ways. When we use public transport, that benefits many ways.  Maintain cars are expensive. Public transport you do not need to worry about any petrol filling, checking tire pressures, getting tired after driving long journey. In future, cutting down public transport affects many of the people. Elderly people won't able to drive, always depends on public transport. If public transport stop services, people who are not able to drive will affect a lot.
Travelling by car is convenient,, but there are this advantage as well. As our population growing fast in a family both husband and wife working and children at university able to drive, so you are looking per house least 3 cars, so imagine how busy our roads will be. As now fuel price coming down that does not mean that it will stay like that forever, price go up and down.

In summary, public transport is important for our community and people have to raise their concerns regarding this. Stopping public transport not going to gain anything rather than impact will be unpredictable. Due to increased traffic may cause delays in arranged journeys, increase the number of accidents...etc.
I think sport is a good exercise for need to exercise people, I have a suggestion that want to have good health, choose an interest sport and try to play it, let it be a regular thing, it will be fun and health your physical constitution.
It was 8:00 in the morning.

Michael just had realized that he didn't hear the alarm clock,, so he gets in panic immediately: - I can't arrive late at work. He thought.

He jumped out of bed and had a quick shower, there was no time for breakfast, consequently he decided to buy something to eat near the office.

After the shower he brings his suit, but he had forgotten that he didn't do the iron last day, moreover he hasn't got any other ironed one, so he did it quickly.

In spit of that he was dressed up on time.

-Everything is in order, it seems that finally I'll arrive on time.

Although it wasn't, he had forgotten to unplug the iron.

Michael closed the door,, and he knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
Plays basketball have the fame that is deserves? 
Nowadays, basketball is the sport which rules in the USA. 90% of the Americans wants to be a basketball star, with the dream of playing with LeBron James, Pay Ga sol, Marc Gasol...

According to the results of a questionnaire (Houston habitants)and most of them, play basketball to forget the homework, problems and to relax in their free time. Also, they think that the main reason for their preference instead of other sport which is more intense. However, they think that basketball is only a reason to meet all the family, friends...

Furthermore, they give advice to those all novice on basketball "don't ever lost the passion" if because they give up, they won't play with the biggest players of the word.
In conclusion, the real objective of the questionnaire consist on what the people think about the king sport of the United States of America.
I've been start jogging for five years. 
It is the way I can unwind because my study it's stressful. 
It gives me a sense of achievement, for these reasons I would like to do every day.
I love jogging because it's a way to stay outdoor immersed in nature.
Furthermore, I think there are not negative side in going jogging.

Furthermore, I have been really on skiing since I was a baby.
My mother make me start.
Since then every year I go to north Italy to practice.
I fell relaxed, staying along near contains and snow.
Hello Oskar!
It is a good restaurant in my town and I think you will like it. It is called 'The Rose' and it is at the city center in front of the station. You will see it when you leave the train. It is a friendly restaurant with a nice menu. The meals are English kitchen and with some of European plates too. When I went there the last, it was on my birthday and I went there with my family. I am like the people who serve there,, and the decoration is pretty. They cook good meal. You must try! 

If you go there, tell me what do you think. I am sure you have a fun time.
Greetings,
Bob
 Public transport has advantages and disadvantages.I will start with disadvantages.
First public transport is neither comfort nor safe. Public transport is very crowded,, so you may not have a seat. I hate public transport as I was attacked by mad man once .also taxi is not good transport. I wish I have my own car soon to get rid of public transport. Travelling with your car make it easier and better. The advantages may include that it has a low price and may rescue you if your car is not work. 
I am writing in regard that your service of outsourcing because I am currently having a problem with my accounted, for this reason I am looking for a new service that can help me.
Can you say now, if you have this service?  
If you can have this service, may you are the people that I am looking.
I appreciate it, could arrange an appointment with you to meet your service.
Please, feel free to contact me if you have any questions.
Best regards.
Rodrigo Andrade S.

I'm a really sportive person I love to different sports I think that it's something that is great for your body and your metabolism, did you know that do exercise can reduce depression and increase the quality of your life?
I think one of my favorites sports of all is the atheism I love it because it is a sport where you prove yourself, you have to be every day better than you were yesterday, it forces you to improve every time, also is an exercise that help all your body, especially the legs because it gives them great strength, but also your hands because they have to be in a constant movement, and all the body in general because you run, and your metabolism is accommodated and help you to have coordination. Furthermore, I enjoy running a lot because it relaxes me, I let out all my worries and frustrations, so it makes me happy.
Furthermore, I recommended all the people who want to run that if you don't feel like you're improving anyway keep going and with the time you will see results.
I am not sure that mines is the best family in the world,, but I am pretty sure that I have the best parents I could never have wished for. There is my mother, my father, my two brothers and me.
I am the biggest of the children, then after me is my brother Side.
Side is 24 years old and at least is Joni, who has only 15 years old. 
Generally I miss them all because I live in a distant city away from where my family lives now. 
I used to live with them for 25 years a Genoa but last year I left home because I found a job in Milan, which is the city where I actually live now. 

Thank you for your attention.
 This is an introduction for how to make banknotes. The first two-step is to design with background color artwork and security issues and prepare metal plates with skilled machinists. Then there are some requirements for printing sheets:color on both sides, special ink and images slightly raised. The most essential and key process is manual inspections for printed sheets with three categories: good quality sheets, partially damaged sheets and bed sheets. The qualified and not damaged severely sheets are supposed to be package and distributed, which will be cut into separate banknotes, packed and then dispatched. On contrary, other failed sheets will be disposal and destroyed with band notes securely.
Once upon a time, a boy was six years old. His name was Michael.
Michael lived in a big house in Denton, Texas. He had a lot of animals: Two dogs and three puppies, four horses, eight ducks and one cat, Lionel.
Lionel was a black and white cat, and it was a very funny, fast and sweet Amina. It was to prefer of Michael. Lionel was the best friend of Michael.
When Lionel was around Michael, the boy was happy.
One day, Michael got up late, and he had going to school at seven o¡äclock. It was Six o¡äclock, and he had to hurry if he would not want to get to school late. 
Michael had breakfast, and he forgot to prepare milk for Lionel. Michael was out all day, and Lionel has not anything for eating....
Michel closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
When I was a little girl I used to play volleyball and I really liked that.
One day I had a surprise, I have met a teacher, and he invited me to trance in a huge gym in a team. 
I started to think that was born for that sport. I worked too hard, but enjoy playing really. 
Sun dully hap panned something, I need to work to play my studies in the High school, so the life changes anyway, I needed to stop my favorite sport, because I should need to study At that moment it was more important for me. 
Today I do not play volleyball anymore, but I really enjoy dancing, now I can say that it is my favorite, it is all of.
The line graph shows the U.S. cigarette price in dollar related to cigarette consumption in billions of packs from 1970 to 2006. The hugest gab is in 1981 where is the cheapest price combined to the highest expenditure of cigarette packs in the whole interval. Roughly in 1998 we can notice an equilibrium price at $2,75 and an equilibrium quantity at 23 billion packs. Later both lines changed their regular trends, so there are a huge imbalance again.
My English is great level, and speaking is my favorite part of learning English. Captain at sports is what I did in high school. I am very pleased to help organize sports activities. 
World is progressing rapidly, day by day there is a new way of transportation, there is a new technology. From the beginning of the world till now, human wants the fast income and the easy ways of live, so he tries more and more to find a solution for his problems by creating a new way of living more easy and more convenient for him.
So that, transportation was one of the most important issues faced human, because it is related to the interaction between people like trading and many other purposes. From this point every human have the ability to buy a car and also buy his rest, he will not hesitate to do it.
It is claimed that our lives will improve in the next fifty years. But we don't if this change would be good or bad, I hope that will be good but let's talk about it.

Firstly, I'd like to talk about employments, I think that these are the most important thing to worry about, if our studies get better, we will create more employments and as a result the economic situation of the country will be better. Moreover, our capacity for learning more languages seems to be really adequate unfortunately while there are a lot of teenagers that are getting prepared really hard, there are others that are all the opposite. 

I think it is probable that in some years the technology could have improved quite a love, and this is a very powerful advantage for us, the young people. Because we were burned in 'the internet generation' as everyone says, so this aspect might be helpful for us.

In conclusion, I've got to said that now we don't have to worry about the future, we just have to carry on in the present and do it the better we can.
Hi Alex!h, How are you? I heard that you went out with Mike! It's a fantastic new! Anyway, I was guessing if you want to go to the cinema with me to see the new Leonardo DiCaprio's movie because I heard that action movies are your favorites. My favorite kind of movie is horror, actually my favorite movie is "The orphan". It talks about a little girl who went adopted,, but she is 35 years old in reality. It is very creepy! Anyway, I hope that you come with me to the cinema. See you soon. Bye
Nowadays, the public transport system are running out of passengers due to heavy use of personal transport such as cars and bikes.in early 1990 the public transport systems were the most popular trans port system across the world because, most of the peoples had not their own vehicle. But in late 1990 most of the people were able to buy their own vehicle due to many financial institutes which has various loan facilities. Today many people use their own vehicle for instead of public transport, the other thing is, it is easy and convenient way to travel to the job and any other personal work. Therefore, it can be seen the demand for public transport getting low and lover.

In conclusion, it is true that the demand for the public going down rapidly as thy have their own vehicles. However, even though everybody has their own vehicles, they will have to use public transport once the roads are full of vehicles.
I have seen the following announcement in International Sport Monthly magazine.
My favorite sport is football, and I enjoy because I love football players.
 I had the opportunity to meet more about this sport.
I would advise you to the person starting the sport endeavor and can fulfill their dream, many can¡ät get what they accomplished those players today are very famous
You can learn with your referee and with coach.
Some people prefer to play together but also there are competition between players.
People¡äs lives will change dramatically in the next 50 years.

I think that this class discussion couldn't true. In the future, people's life had better.
Providing that we care in the environment. It¡äs really important. If we live well, we will be more carefully with the world.
Otherwise, everybody wanted a future better.
Nowadays, there are a lot of things that we're doing the live easier.

In order that, if I were you, I would live well in the next 50 years.
I'm looking forward, so people will have more interesting by this case.
For instance, my family don¡ät think that will happen in the next 10 years.
They live at the moment. Besides, they said that in all the moment: 'Carpe diem'.

This is other opinion. 
I'm Mad from Egypt. My family consists of 5 members-my father, my mother and two brothers. My father is a businessman. He is 65 years old. He works in real state investment. My mother is a teacher. She is 50 years old. She is working in primary school. My older brother is 30 years old, and he is working as accountant for radio and television union in Cairo. The younger brother is 25 years old. He is a dentist. He is doing master in Turkey these days. The last member is me, I'm Aeronautical engineer in Qatar. I love my family but everybody stays and living in different place or country. The best brother for me is the second one, who is a dentist. He is my best friend and brother. I hope if I can live with him in the same place. He is very helpful and collaborator. We spent a fun time in the beginning of our life when we were kids. I really love my mother and father. They spent their life helping us to be good men. My older brother helped us in studying, but he is older than I by 10 years, so the relation between us isn't strong.
Anyway, I'm very happy to write for you.

 
This assertive is totally false.

The expansion of public transport is one of the keys to saving the planet, especially if the energy source used come from clean sources.

Nowadays, the use of vehicles powered by gasoline and diesel is the main cause of air pollution in big cities around the world. Researches show that the private cars are used most often carrying few people at a time, what makes it very inefficient considering the quantity of carbon dioxide and other toxic substances expelled to the environment each time that the engine is started.


 




Lady decided to visit her boyfriend. But she is boyfriend live upstate and hasn¡¯t got an airport he¡¯s of city because of that she was need to choose by train. She was just prepared a suitcase after that went to train station. 

In my opinion I think that the increase of teenage crime is because their parents do not put limits on them, and how not pay attention, they make all kinds of serious mistakes.
From my point of view, the best thing the police can do with these people is send them to a reformatory until they can leave disciplined. Another good option is give them a difficult work for everyday to keep them busy, but I don't know what kind of job can be, because a person who commit a crime isn¡ät going to do something to help society like communitarian service.  
?

I felt nervous when the phone rang. I was sitting calmly Ina caf¨¦, when I heard it ringing. Firstly, I thought
it could be one of my best friends as we really liked to have lunch together. But I saw an unknown phone number on a display and felt a little nervous. What if it were my boss or clients and possibly something dreadful had happened to my job. It went on ringing and with great fear I clicked on the green button. Luckily, it was my colleague Jane who wanted to drink a CP of fresh coffee with me. 
The flowchart provides an overview of the steps of making banknotes, it shows that how banknotes are manufactured from designing to think we can use.
This process involves five main stages. First, it should take some considerations in design, including background color, artwork,security issues. Next, skilled machinists is prepared, in which there are metal plates. Then the printer will print some sheets into banknotes(50 banknotes per sheet). Subsequently, the technical must be used specially for distinction, for example the color printed on both sides, Special ink is used and images slightly raised. After this, printed sheets will be inspected carefully. According to the quality of sheets, it will be two results. If the quality is good or the banknotes is partially damaged which can be used, it would cut into separate banknotes, then it is packed and dispatched. While those bad sheets will be securely destroyed.
This is IRA. I am from Karachi, Pakistan. My height is about5.2, hair color is dark brown, eye color is black, and I will be wearing jeans and long shirt. I will be arrived at 20 past to 3.
Describe a supermarket near your home
There are not very big Supermarket near my home, but there is a nice one. It is situated in main bolivar cross, my home. The space is about 100 m^2, and it has different automatic doors for inter and exit. Near to the entry gate, person say welcome to customers and answer their questions. There are some big shelves in center of market are divided to some different parts for kinds of goods like dried fruit, nuts, flour, condiment, beans, grains, rice, etc. Also, a section for Detergents, tissue, perfumes, etc. You can see some store fridge around the market for Drinks and Dairy like milk, yogurt, cheese, butter and cream Also chest freezers for Ice creams. In a corner, they sell cosmetics and a salesperson helps customers to find their required. There is a cashier next to the exit door, and you can pay by credit card or cash.

When you talk with someone, have you ever thought in your words before you say it ? A lot of us never think before they speak, and that is not a good thing to do. You must think a little before you talk as one word causes a lot of pain for others for the rest they live .you may not actually notice that, but you will feel what am really mean if someone tells you a painful word. It is clear that everyone is ought to make a mistake without even noticing. For example, a kid named Michael. Michael is a good boy, and he always listens to his mother .on time Michael was very angry as he got a bad score in his test .when he was home his mother was cooking she asked him what is the wrong ? He said bad words that he will regret saying these words .he went to his room. Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
Dear friend,

It was great to hear from you again.

In your last email, you told me about your lack of time for enjoying your hobbies. I can understand how difficult this decision must be. However, if I were you, I would do what I have always wanted. And I know which matter you've always been interested: music. I remember when you told me once you are playing a violin for four hours. 

So, a good idea would be to keep yourself doing creative things. Anyway, you could always do any sport in your extra-free time. As it's often said: a good body makes a good mind. 

I'm looking forward to hearing from you again. Tell me what you decide.

Love,
Anabel
I don¡ät like the public transport of school. It is slow, inefficient and dangerous. I prefer to travel in the car or motorbike, I am feeling security. In my family, travel in the taxi, because the taxi is fast and secure. Today I felt bad in the public transport. It was slowly.
Also, I can see the air pollution is tallest. Compared to car or bus, the car is the most expensive than bus, because the car is comfortable and faster. The taxi, so it is.
In the morning, I go to the school in the bus with my brothers,, but they get out earliest.
I prefer to travel in the car.
Once upon the time there was a little man called Michael, that man has a heart of a little child and the brave of a big man. 
he had a girlfriend called sin ha who was a girl with a big heart but unfortunately broken one.
One day Michael decided to make a surprise party to sin ha to make her happy and feel his love more, so he arranged everything and to keep it surprise to her, he was busy all the time and did not show off all the week as usual .that make sin ha worried and suspect that Michael do not love her anymore and know another girl, and she become extremely sad, and even it becomes worse when Michael asked her to go to his apartment to make the surprise to her but he did not answer his phone after that.
When he come she starts crying and thought he would break up with her, and she did not give him a chance to talk or explain anything she started to cry louder and accused him of cheating that make Michael astonished how she did not trust in him, how she thought that about him and he told her that he can not stand that any more he would break up with her, and he left. Michael close the door and knew at the moment he had made a mistake 
There¡¯s no discussion which is my favorite restaurant in town, The Seaside. I will tell you why and also why it¡äs so appropriate for us, as a class, to take our last farewell there. Our class has reformed over the years, with great classmates leaving and coming we have always been welcoming about it, and not at least towards the new ones. It¡äs not necessarily to be nice and keen to everyone but our class actually is, in the weekends the whole class gather in different events together. I think the welcoming process in the beginning is crucial for this fellowship we have today and probably in 10 years too. 
What I just told is what the restaurant Seaside means to me. Welcoming. Fellowship. At the Seaside¡äs you are genuinely welcomed at the first doorstep, they accept you whoever you are. This makes TH 

 In fact, this topic is very important in our modern times. My favorite sport, it affects me greatly.i`m a lungful player. This sport is my favorite, but sometimes I think about to leave this sport. Because in later time I hate a blood, so I think a lot of time to leave this sport. But it is dominated to me. it`s makes me likes an animal, when i`m standing and get ready to fight i`m convert into enemy.i`m a fucking ghost and I can kill anyone who tried to stop me. So, i`m rely on thinking left this sport.Every day I get up early and exercise in the garden with my friends.i`m exercising more and more again to improve myself and become the best fighter in the world.i`m champion in my sport so, i`m seek to do all my effort to be the first one in the world. Finally I did not find encourage of my family or my teachers.  
Hello to everybody!! Now, I¡äm going to talk about the benefits o learning another language.
I am from Spain, so my foreign language is Spanish
I start to study another language when I was a child, I started learning English because every one said that English is the future language, when I finished my school time I tried to study French but it was so difficult for me.
 I have to say that study another language give you more opportunities because on these days you need to no other language to look for a work and be more intelligent than your college to take the work and that¡¯s great. 
And to day is necessary because if you want to travel around the world and meet people and have conversation with their you need to now more than your foreign language, because in the rest of the world and particularly in Europe people now more than two language and that great.
I think learning other language never have drawbacks because all you learn is good for you and your main, you never stop to know new things.

These days, most of the people feel comfortable to travel through car, and then they believe that public transport is not going to be sustained for longer time. However, I do not agree with them because in most part of the world mass transport system is still popular, and they are environment friendly and cost-efficient. 

Firstly, Public bus service is very popular in most part of the world. In most part of the Europe, people still prefer public bus to car to travel. 
Secondly, public transport are environmentally sound in comparison to private vehicle. It carries more people, while private vehicle carries fewer people. Public bus do not let more cars to contaminate environment. 
Finally, Public transport's cost-efficient. People need to spend more money on fuel if they want to travel the same destination by private vehicle.

In conclusion, although car is convenient to travel, it is not enough to finish the future of public transportation. 
In the towns of the future, the care of the environment is one of the most important things. People have contained themselves that we need to respect the nature and the human places where we live. Human beings have destroyed our environment along the time and now, the earth is in danger. First place we need to care about is our near place, the town. I like to take out the trash every night and I try to recycle my trash, throwing it in different bags. I have recently bought an electric car in substitution of my traditional car. An electric car is less harmful for the environment. When I go out to the camp, if I lunch there, I take care of cleaning the ground. I like nor the dirty people, neither the dirty places. I hope to live in the future in a clean town, and I¡äm sure that the most of the people are now thinking in this way. We need to care of our town because nobody like to place into a dump.
Dear. Lou
This is Dani from ueecx13
By your favor, I can study at UNSW from the next year.
I really appreciate your encouraging us for every time in class.
Best wishes for a beautiful holiday season and a very happy new year. 

I live in a small city in the middle of Vietnam. This city don't have a lot of citizens, but It's a travel city. So in the street always have a lot of trash cans. It will help people not throw the garbage in the street. In our city have a billboard to urge people to have attention to environment. In the school set up a workshop to tell with students important environment to our live. 
The citizen of the city want to build the city with the slogan" The city green - clean - beautiful". So they have aware to keep the city reach that. So everyone brings the trash to the place permission. 
Every year have" earth hour". In this hour, many people turn off the light in their house to save energy and protect the environment. I am very proud about the awareness from my city people. I wish have a lot of people around the world see the importance of environment. And they have to act to protect it.
Hello,
I want the job for the summer camp I'm looking for children between 8-12 years old I will help to organize sports and evening activities and if you want I could work in the kitchen



if I have the job, write soon
                                 
 



 Victoria
Hello! I begin to study technical English. I need this course for my new job. Furthermore, I want to this course, it helps me to enlarge my vocabulary. And I need your help with this. Would you like to improve this course with me? Please, writes me a list with the words when I need for technical conversation. Thank you very much. 
Dear Teacher Mary 

I am writing to give my opinion of the restaurant "The Crazy Cat" this is a very good restaurant.

First the restaurant have wide variety in his food. The chef can make the menu of the day to the dinner,, or you can choose a special menu. The purpose of the chef is soup and creamed corn to start, beef medallion covered bittersweet of carrot sauce with nuts and the dessert chocolate cake with cheese.

The atmosphere is also very good, has music in live with different bands. You can choose two bands of rock or pop and one DJ. 

The cost is accessible. The pack have a cost of $350 a person.

 
Can a TV program get to entertain and educate at the same time? Nowadays, it is the most important challenge for television. People complain about how the information about different TV shows don't contribute in the process of learning, that's why many of These programs are considered trash, because of the multiples shows such as realities, talk shows, or showbiz that hardly ever have a good message or something interesting for people. 
A good example of these shows are how people are paid to act in realities or talk show where they show exaggerated or hilarious familiar problems, where the only aim is to get more audience.  Another good example is the endless showbiz that are appeared recently, this type of programs where the information is often gossip about personal life of famous singers and actors without taking into account if they are true or not.
It's a pity to know that exist just a few programs that try to educate people with the most update information through documentaries, investigations, cultural or opinion programs, which in my opinion help to acquire more knowledge. Knowledge that are sometimes unknown even though it is part of the general culture or proper of the history of our country.  
I think in the future don't exist public transport because we will drive their car. When you drive your own transport, a car for example, you're going to from a specifically place but in a bus you go to the bus stop and no to your house or school, work...
It is better from the people to be more comfortable because you drive and not the other person. I know some people, the drivers, began haven't got work, but the public transport is free and is free because it is the government pay, this money became do to make more work for others. No all is good some people haven't got money can't go to another place to another place and the pollution became more and more, it is a serious problem and the solution is only for the rich people, the solution is bought an electric car, the other solution, more economic, does the government give the money to the population to buy an electric car. I don't know what is better, no public transport or public transport.
There is no future for public transport since everybody prefer to use their own car. Now time is valuable for every body, nobody bothered about money. Traffic is very high in now days, so it will be difficult to reach office on time. Public transport is always crowded,, so it is not comfort to travel
 Find your joy in scary movie

 I would ignore thriller films due to my fragile heart, but my mind is changed now after watching this film.

 The film is entitled ¡°Scary Movie¡± which is directed by Keenan Ivory Mayans. This story was shown a murder who completed the mission: killed everyone that he hated. At last, only one person could be alive, even those sacrificed had tried to escape this horrible result. This is a combined story of horror and comedy.

 I cannot find a word to describe this film easily, what can I say is you will be regret if you miss this film. This first reason is all actors shown their talent in this film directly and audience can follow their steps and the story certainly, this essential element which also makes a big success to the film. Besides, the attractive story line makes a lot of climaxes so that everyone can finish this film from the beginning to the end and creates the billion box office to this film. However, I think the tools should be improved, such as killer¡¯s knife and actors'costumes, the knife looks like as brittle as a handicraft, I believe those are seconded-handed clothing. I think this is a pity to this movie.

 At last, your bravery can be improved after watching this film. What are you waiting for? Go and check it out!

Hi everyone, my name is Jaime and I have my wife and a little child. My wife's name is Maritza, she is 30 years old, she is a beautiful and joyful woman, my son's name is Rafi, he is 3 years old, he is very handsome and fun child.
My wife likes to go outside when she is free, she likes to visit touristic places. My son likes playing sports, he is very little, but he plays football, she is a very active child.
I'm studying medicine, this major is too challenging although stressful, because the self-study is every day and there are a lot of information. This major involves all, always we have to consider the all possibilities to resolve homework, you have to know the most possible information for can resolve it. When you got the answer or solution, you can see that all effort worthwhile.
Our teachers are doctors, and they are in charge of teach us about work-team, so it's common that one/two people do all work... with this I want to say : is rewarding when our teacher ask something, and you know the answer because you could study all topic.
I have experience to go to the hospital and was too interesting. I deal with medicine students who are superior to me, for example, doctors and surgeon. Furthermore, I only could oversee what they do to obtain visual experience and know how was a surgery.
How learning English

It's proven that to learn a foreign language you have to go abroad. You can study hard for years, but if you aren't obligated to use English for things of every day, you won't become good at it. There aren't other options.

Of course, also studying in a foreign country has disadvantages. First, it costs a lot. Even there are lots of different possibilities and scholarship, not everyday can allow they.
Living abroad, even though for a short time, it could be very stressful and people can feel homesick.

Despite that, there are more reasons to go studying away. It is a very useful experience in many ways. You will learn better and faster than studying at home. In addition, visit new countries and meet new cultures, helps to open your mind and to foster a lot. I did several school trips in the past years, and I'm going to do it again, sure.
Hi Patty,
 My name is Lucia P¨¦rez. I am 14 ears old.
 I live with my brother and my parents in a house in Junta Carr etas. 
 I like going to the cinema to watch movies. I like travelling with my family and friends, I like travelling because I can meet new people, places and cultures. 
 I don't have a favorite subject, but l like English because we can communicated all over the world.
 I love my cousin's house,, so I always visit him. He is 16. He is in 5o. Furthermore, he is going to Clara Jackson High school. He lives in Prado, so I have to take two buses and that is very tiring.
The name of my Best Friends are Agustina, Emilia and Micaela, we are strange friends, we are in 6o together and At that moment we became friends. 

My name is Fecund Mendoza. I'm fifteen years old.
I live in La Paz, in a house with my mother and my father.
Furthermore, I have two pets, a dog and a bird.
Furthermore, I like watching television, playing computer games and swimming. 
My favorite types of film are science fiction, animation and historical. My favorite film is Avatar because the effects are amazing, and the sound is very good.
My favorite types of games are adventure, war, historical and horror.
I play online with any people from the world.
I went to a club for two years and I swam there for two years.
Sometimes I go to the beach and I swim in the sea.
I prefer playing football to basketball.
I play basketball in the school.
Furthermore, I was born in 1996 on the 31 of January. 
Carbohydrates are essential for a healthy diet. It provides energy for our bodies. Nutritionists recommend the quarter of a person's diet should contain carbohydrates. When your body takes an insufficient amount of carbohydrates, the protein replaces the lack of carbohydrates to supply the body with energy. And this will cause diseases on the long run.
Dear reader, 

My name is Andreas Mired, and I am 18 years. I am from Sweden,, but I have been living in Barcelona since I was young. Nowadays, I am studying a degree in economics at the University of Barcelona. I am applying for the job vacant in the summer camp.

I have some experience working with children aged between 5 and 17 years. Last year I was working every Friday and Sunday at a ski camp in la Mayella. Also, this summer I went to the United States, and I was working in a summer camp. 

Nowadays, people have a lot of afraid about contamination of Planet. All governments increasing their politic laws about this topic, and also they promoted new rules in the daily life of the population. One of the new rules about the reduction of contamination in the cities is the transport public.

According to the general world laws about the global world warm, each country has considered its owns arguments about it.

I can give us an example how big cities around the world can reduce more contamination. London is a good example, and Barcelona too.

These cities don't allow driving in the center city, the industry reduces its taxes if it's increasing the politic nature.
My city is a good example, too. The town major has offered to population free bus. It's a good idea to remove the traffic jam.

I think, in conclusion, all people should have a good behavior and an open mind and they and myself also to catch more often the public transport.
My country is the best country in the world. I love it so much. We have different cultures here, and two main languages, Arabic and Amazing. Morocco is a kingdom, like Spain and England, We have king and princes.
My day in London!
I went to London in the summer. I liked London, because there are a lot of great things. On Monday, me and my friend Chrissy went to the Big Ben. We went to the Broader. But the best was the Guarda from Buckingham Palace. Chrissy made a funny face,, but the Guards didn't say anything. We had very, very good weather. It was fantastic. The temperatures were over 20 degrees. We travelled to London by plane, but to come back we travelled by car ABD boat. After we came back, I told my family everything.
My favorite sport is football. This is an international sport because in all parts of world there are persons that they play. Football is a famous sport you can watch it on TV or to can see it on direct. There Ara a lot of level categories, the most famous categories is the first. People that they play in this categories are famous although you can see them on TV. If you want to be a big football player you must practice more time and your life should to be healthy. You must care your food and yours habits for you to have a healthy body.
This sport is the best of the world and the most famous and I think that this is the most enjoyed.
Soccer is the best sport for me because you can get fit, meet other people and participate in competitions.
If you want to start practicing this sport, you should be prepared to work hard. 
This is a story from a country where there were no cats. One day, an elderly foreign lady visited the country with no cats. She gave the King an adorable kitten which she had brought with her.

 Goodbye letter, 
Dear Ms Cummings,
   
 How are you ? I am fine, I am very sad to hear you say that you are going to leave our school soon, I don't really want you to leave this school! Because you are the best teacher in the whole world!many of our class classmate really like you too! We know that you are going to teach Discovery-bay primary school. My English result is better once you taught me I really love you, Ms Cummings!your friend Ms Deck told me that she is going to Australia, and I love you two both I hope you that you will come back sometimes !
 



 Love, Diana Km 2014.1.9
           
 The graph given shows the seasonal sales of ice-cream from two places at an English seaside resort from 2012 to 2014, they are separately an ice-cream van and an indoor public swimming pool.
 As the graph indicates, the sales at ice-cream van was generally larger than that at indoor swimming poor. For the ice-cream van, it sale most in Jul-Sep each year, nearly reached 5000 dollars, and it was still slightly increasing year by year. In every year, from January to July, the sales slightly increased and reached the peak at the third season, then it gradually slides back to the year's bottom. Each year was nearly the same. For indoor swimming poor, its sales didn't have large changes, usually sale about 2000-3000 dollars for each season. It usually sale most in Apr-Jun and Oct-Dec and slid to the bottom in Jul-Sep. In general, its sales were falling with the time went by. 
There was a nice spring morning. Both of them were young, beautiful and naive. She put her cup of coffee on the windowsill, hooked up the wrist on her beautiful little breast, put right her colorful light-minded skirt, took her orange scarf and red little purse and went to the door.
He stood up near the open window, smoked and looked at her without any words. When she said goodbye, he just nodded. When she looked at him from under her long eyelashes, he turned away and stared at the landscape outside. 
When she made to step out, Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
Nowadays, we constantly use means of transport to go everywhere so that our lifestyle. Society depends on them. We are used to traveling by car, in fact each family has one. Despite, travelling by public transport can be a better option in so many cases. Certainly, cities will be crowded in the future because population is always increasing. Using your own car to go to the citycentre could be a nightmare, it would be a stressful waste of time. Unbearable traffic jams and no parking areas would be the main problems. Besides, the price of petrol is increasing too, and it likely will be as expensive that most people not be able to afford a car.
In contrast, there will be cheaper alternatives as bus, train or even plane for long distances.
In other hand, many drivers enjoy travelling by his vehicle because they like to drive, and they feel free.
Finally, governments and society are concerned about the environment and I consider that they will decrease levels of pollution and co2 editions.
From my point of view, public transport will not disappear even if cars are much more comfortable, faster and more evolved than now.  
My town is very small.

His name is Santa Marta, and he is near Trujillo.

In my town, we can see a big swimming pool, five parks, four bares and one state school.

In my town there are a lot of old people, and there are nor many children, because they love in other cities.

I love my town, because when I was a small girl, I went there, and I was with my grandparents, my cousins and my friends.

My best friend live in Madrid, but We were always together in her house or in my house¡äs grandparents.


I have been very happy, and today I am happy there.



Dear Amanda:

How are you? I am fine.

I miss you so much. How is your baby?

I could go to Madrid. You and I can see us.

Next month, I'm going to go to our town. You be able to go? Will is fantastic!

I hope to see you quick.

Our friends always ask me for you and your family.

Oh! My brother, David, going to marry! Surprise!

I wish that you be able to go to the wedding.

My boyfriend and I have a present for your small baby, Nick.

I love so much, my dear friend.

The diagrams below show how banknotes are made through four steps and how bad sees and notes are disposed.

To begin with, the format of the banknotes needs to be designed, factors of considerations including the background color, the artwork and the security issues. Sencondly, equipments like skilled machinists as mental plates should be prepared for the next steps. Thirdly, print the sheets of banknotes(50 banks notes per sheet)with special ink, where color is considered on both sides and images will slightly raise on the banknotes.

Most importantly, manually inspected on each printed sheet in case that there would exist damaged sheets. Once damaged sheets are discovered, partially separate them into good and bad ones and then burn the bad notes, making sure that the remaining sheets are of good quality.

Good sheets are cut into separate banknotes, then packed and dispatched to other place, comparing with which, the bad ones have to be destroyed securely.
The movie which I have chosen to write about is microphone. It is An Egyptian movie acted by Khaled aboelnaga and young actors. The actions of this film took place in Alexandria city of Egypt, and it talks about some young people who need a good chance to deliver their voices to people as they didn't have much money to produce their own albums, that sort of bands is famous between the youth, and they call it "underground bands" .their songs give a big concept to the political and social situation in Egypt, and they become famous after the25 January regulation, why I choose this movie as it reflects what happens in our society, there is no chance for the youth and if they found it, they face a lot of problems to save it, and they didn't find time for other activities and in sometimes they worked in thing which they never learn or love 
I live in a small city, then there are few things that my town made for the environment: like the recycling, therefore we must know of what is made the material that we throw, and put them in the right dumpster. This is a little act for us, but if we all contribute will be a big help for the environment. We also can use appliance that not consume so much, if we can adopt sustainable electric systems or buy organic products. In the big cities they have begun to build green buildings, they use the electrical public transport not to pollute. In my opinion there may be many rules, but if we don't respect it, we will not help our habitat.
The most exciting day on my life was May 9th,last year, when I attend the secondary school. I stayed in France with my friends and my teachers. I woke up very early. I catch the bus and I waved my mum. Then I talked with my friends about our holiday. After six hours, we had lunch on a fast food to France. Next we visited a famous aquarium where I looked a lot of fish. It was interesting! In the evening we had dinner on a particular restaurant and my friends and I did many photo with a famous sight. I was admiring the sea while my friends looked around the shop. The days after we were in a performs and I bought a present for my mum. My teacher wanted to our speak to French. In the end, my friends and I jumped into the sea. It was crazy. I will never forget this experience!
The cat LOCAL
At a nice day, my old brother surprise me. He bought a cat. It is a first time for me to play with a cat. It is a nice experience. I called it LOCAL because it's color like an almond. The almond is called in Arabic LOZ. LOCAL is four months old. It is a female cat. LOCAL plays with balls and ropes. It likes my laptop, and it plays with the Cursor. That is funny but makes me nervous. The LOLA cat is Shiraz type. It sleeps eighteen hours per a day.  The nice sleeping of it is when it's watching anime. It plays with children very well. When the children went out, it became sad. I love its soft hair. It runs behind the ants and flies. It eats chicken, tuna, milk and cheese. Furthermore, it hates the water. When we need to punish it, we spreed some drops of water at its face. I hope it to be a good cat and a good experience for me.
Dear Bob,
my firs job was babysitter. I have to look forward to two little boys: seven and nine years old. I was seventeen years old, when I decided to accept this work. The parents of these boys were friends of my parents. I have been the babysitter of these children for all that summer and I enjoyed so much with them. They lived in a big house with a lovely swimming pool where we can swim and play. At the end of the summer, I have kept on seeing these boys to help them during the school year.

This experience helped me a lot because I become much more responsible not only with these boys but also with my brothers and sister (I had two brothers and one sister)and I have learned the meaning to work and receive money. 

I didn't have problems because the children were quiet and respectful, and also because I have known them since they were newborn.

I hope to have satisfied to all your questions. Have a good work
CLA'

I grew up in a parent family. Sometimes I felt that I was alone and not loved. However, we were lucky enough to have a great mother who tried all her best to keep my older brotherly older sister and I for completing our college studies. Of course my uncle, young brother of my mother gave a big hand to go through the hard, so that made us often help each other in my family when the member who was in hard. Especially I was the youngest member in the family, made much more troubles when I was young.  I had truancy and did not pay attention to studies. That really the biggest harm to a hard-working woman whom my mother tried all her best to feed me up and help me complete my studies. All the members of my family never give me up, and I finished my college studies, too. I have a good job now. I do really thank my mother and all the members for paying the patient and exertion to me. Now we have great relationship with each other and treasure the happiness we get, not so easy. So, are the members of my family my best friends'll answer you their's not much better answer than Yes
How my town takes care of the environment
First let me introduce my town I live in Kabul city the capital of Afghanistan. This town is located in the central zone of the Afghanistan with 4462(km2) space, and has more than seven Million populations, the economic and security situation is not suitable and these factors have directly effect in to the carefulness of environment. 
The most important factor in the environment improvement is the lock of the required knowledge between the local people. 
 Based on the Necessity people and government in this town together effectually takes care to the environment.
 Municipality of the mentioned town is collect the garbage Form Street and roads and shipped to the 
specific area.
Fortunately Kabul structured by Mountains and have mountainous climate, approximately this town have 15 (mm) Raining per year the remarkable Agricultural area and forestry all around the town have a positive effect for the Kabul city environment and producing Fresh air for the citizens of the mentioned town 



 
 
There is no future for public transport.
I agree with this point.
Public transport are busy nowadays.
More people are using it and it getting rush.
It's creating a lot of troubles by standing on the edge of the buses and metros.

Doing sports is my hobby because I find it interesting, and it makes me healthy. Actually, there are a lot of kinds of sports that I like, but the most interesting sports for me is football. Usually, I play football with my friends in stadium. I suggest you to do sports because it makes us healthy.
Dear Mr/ms of summer camp.
I am interested to work with you. This is an opportunity excellent for me because I want to work like an English teacher.
I studied in an English school and learning English since I was a child, my teachers were all natives and I practiced my English with them always.
After I studied to be English teacher in the university of Extremaduran. I am a English teacher now.
I like the children and working with them. They are very good pupils. They learn and understand very good English.
I have worked in the holiday English school this year and I have learned a lot of with this experience.
I have organized activities like: sports, visit to city, festivals, etc.
Furthermore, I love to be with them, they help me to do my work, they teach me to be better person, I have more patient now, and I know now to be happy.
Furthermore, I live alone, so I always cook my food. The cooking is one of my hobbies. I like to eat very good, and I practice several kinds of foods.
I think that I am the person for your job because I have all that you are looking for.
Furthermore, I hope yours news.
Sincerely
Selena L¨®pez
 My favorite sport
                    
 There are so many sports in the world, like basketball, baseball, running, yoga, swimming, and so on.
 Anyone has their favorite sports. Someone likes to go hiking, others likes dancing, still others like playing
               volleyball. And, either do I. I also like sports. One of them which I like most is badminton.
 
                    Why my favorite sports are badminton? There are some reasons. First, exercising can make you 
               become more healthy. Second, playing badminton can activate all body, like hands, arms, feet. Third, when I
               play it with someone, whatever just for fun or for the game, my body will feel so hot in thirty minutes.
 Then, it can play indoor, also, it can play under the sun. Finally, I am good at playing badminton.

 Playing badminton can do lots of great things for you, expect good for health, it also can make a lot
               of fun and play with family or friend happily. If someone answers me what the best sport is, I will say:
               Badminton is.  
My favorite sport is badminton because I used to practice it when I was a child and I loved it. 
It seems to me a complete sport because you can practice it in pairs or in an individual way. To be good at badminton you need to prepare yourself in a physical way, but also the psychological part is very important. 
You have to be able to play for a long time, analyze your opponent¡äs mistakes to win and to have measure about your energy for no to be exhausted before the match is over. 
For someone who is starting this sport I would give just one advise: enjoy. Because if you are trying to win you will lose the most important thing, to discover how wonderful to play a sport could be.
Now days young people are influence towards the western culture so, they are getting more fashionable. Youngster are interested to wear different stylish and colored clothes. They are happy with wearing different color clothes. They didn't want to wear our cultural dress such as sari, dhoti,chili and many more. They only like to wear shirt, pant skirt¡¯t shirt and many more. Youngster are influence by watching different programs on television. 
Sport is an important part of my life. Two years ago, when I was still in school. Many classmates went to different sections of the sport. But I couldn't go with them at the time, I was sick a lot. One day, my friend invited me to karate. He gave me 3 days to think about it. I decided and went. It was strange because I never went to the sports. From the time I started going to karate. After one month, my instructor told me that I will go to the competition. I was very worrying and nervous.  The day of the competition, and I came with others to show how I'd practiced. Then instructor said my name and I went out on the Tatami. When I left I had a special feeling, many people look and clapping. It took 3 minutes, I won with three accounts too. I was very happy because it was my first competition. After the end of the competition, we were all awarded medals and certificates. Then as always sounded Kazakhstan hymn. This time I felt like a champion it was really especially feeling. When I went to karate, I'm not even sick. Sport has given me a boost of vitality, energy, optimism and strengthen the immune system.
My most exciting day was the June 8th 2014, an international competition in Belgium. The day before there were the qualifications, that I passed. The day of the finals, I was so nervous, but determined. There were athletes who are European champions and I picked up all my courage and I did my exercises very well, except for a fall from the beam. After the competition, I was relaxed and happy, because I have done my job. Eventually I placed 7th both beam and floor, and after we took the photos I go back to the changing room. When I left, some girls were out of the dressing room with a sheet and a pen in the hands,, and they asked me an autograph. I was really surprised and happy, I would never have thought! The little girls thanked me, then I go to eat with my team and the day after we went back to Italy. 
An easy recipe are cookies. You need butter, flour, sugar, eggs, vanilla and chocolate. Mix butter, eggs and vanilla. 
The mixture must be smooth and compact. Pour the chocolate and cut the cookies with a round shape. Baker them for 15 minutes
Dear Mrs. Morgan

I am writing with regard to find accounting services for my company. I know that you have experience to search the best employees, and you have quality.
Furthermore, I need the services for a year,, so Can you provide those services?
Furthermore, I need that my employees are punctual and that they have responsibility in their job because we are talking about the money of the company.
Thanks for your help and I hope you will find the best company for me.



 Yours sincerely
                                                                     Alexandrina
The world is changing around. Technologies are moving on in high speed. As the technologies world is moving fast and the automobile industry is also coming with new variant of cars & scooters in very economical way. Buying cars and scooters are more convenient than the last decade. In few decade, people earnings and living style have also changed. People now buying cars and scooters as per their convenience and pocket. Earlier people used to buses, taxes, autos for reaching offices, schools, colleges, shopping etc. Which was time-consuming and obliviously cheaper way of commuting from one place to others. Since today worlds are time saving world hence people don't care about their pocket. Using personal vehicles is more convenient to them than using public transport. So the public transport's importance is reducing every day. If it so, there will a time when single people will not be interested for public transport. This has tremendous impact on other aspect. Fuel consumption has increased in a few years. Net of cars and bikes is reason for heavy traffic jam every side. Ratio of road accidents has been increased in few decades. People not even care about safety parameters while driving on road. I must say that Public transport is lifeline in today worlds.
PUBLIC TRANSPORT
Public transport is a very useful resource, you can travel without polluting the atmosphere, and it is very cheap. But, why it will disappear? 
Nowadays, we usually travel very often to many places, so for us is more comfortable our cars, but for the atmosphere and for our wallets, it isn't. 
Using public transport we will avoid traffic and so many accidents, so why we don't use it more? It will be a great advance for people and for the atmosphere, and as well for the countries because we will save a lot of money
I recommend you to use public transport.

I think that family's members couldn't be friends because the relation is very different. There are many good reasons to say that.
Firstly, family is the base of the relationships.
Secondly, although the friendship and love are the most important feelings, the family structures the person and influences their behavior.
I feel my family differently from my friends.
Although I have a good relationship with my parents, I couldn't think of them like friends.
Some people think that this is possible, but I disagree because it confuses roles in the family. 
The parents have to give education to the children over obviously love 
In conclusion I think that two relationship are different.
Perhaps I think that this statement is false because I think that statement should say that the public transport is going to have in the future because travelling by car is not so much more convenient.
I think that travelling by car is good because you have your own sit and in the winter your car is hot, and you also can listen to the radio.
In the public transport you don't have your own sit, so sometimes you travel standing which is not very comfortable and in winter you don't have air conditioning so if it's cold in the outside it's cold inside the transport to, sometimes you have to travel with sick people that can transmit you the illness.
Otherwise, the public transport don't pollute but the car pollute so for us travelling by car is better than traveling by public transport but for the atmosphere is better travelling by public transport than travelling by car 
My bedroom is light and modern.
The walls are green and blue, on the green wall there are some of my photos, and on the wall there are some photos of my brother.
There is a bedside table in the middle of two beds, on this there are the alarm clocks and the book that we read
There are two wardrobes, one for me and one for my brother.
There is a stereo system on the bench and started around the room there are a lot of puppets 
There is a clothes hanger near the window and the curtains are yellow, green, blue, violet and white.
Near my bedroom, there is a little room, in this room there are my red desks, a white bookshelf and one globe.

Hello, my name is habitat Zahid I am fifteen years old, I live in Egypt. I like English very much, I like learning new languages and things. I am not a native speaker of English,, but I wish that I will be one day. What makes me like learning new languages is how it makes me communicate with others easily, I also like traveling so much as it makes me see new places and learn more about other countries around the world and their cultures and traditions however, I don't travel outside my country because I am a student and I don't have my own money which I can spend it on what I like. My dreams when I grow up that I travel a lot around the world, marry a romantic funny person, have a good life and be a good mother like my mother. 
No one can deny the importance of the public transport, but actually this importance is in turn to private sector transport.
And this importance of private transport because private transportation provide a comfortable mean to move from one place to another, also it is help to keep a time and reduce costs which spending in public transportation.
Firstly, that private transport provide a comfortable mean to travelling from one place to another without sharing stranger people a way and by using this kind of transport also comfortable in free with choosing time of a trip. 
Secondly, it is a good way of travelling or moving from one place to another without wasting a time in waiting a specific time to move or even waste a time in waiting a public transportation to reach all point it should get it, but in the other side when you have your own transport or private transport is got a right to choose time of trip or when you want to move or stay, and nowadays, we cannot waste our time in taking public transport.
Finally, a public transport need more costs, because public transport (such a bus, train) fees every year is increasing, and this problem we do not face it by private transport,
 
 The main goal of the thesis is to discuss the three different children's editions of the dream of the red chamber : Than Wei edition, Via Wen edition and Fend Che edition as the object of research. To begin with, Li Men edition of the dream of the red chamber have 120 units.  In comparison with Li Men edition, the three children's editions have something dissimilarity in plot, title, topic, character, language and so on. We will discuss how to present the feature in differ aspects such as education, entertainment, literature and children. Besides, an adaptation is connected with Li Men edition. It can help readers to feel the culture and traits in Qing Dynasty.
This graph shows people from India Pakistan and West Indies entered the UK, from 1940 to 1970. People from India and Pakistan, came to the UK significantly increased around 10 times in 1970, compared to 1940.
Now I will talk about the Drama, a Japanese restaurant that was for me a very good experience. First, the food was very delicious. The Yakimeshi, the sushi and all the dished was like a taste of the real Japan. Also, you can see how they prepare your food in front of you. The tables have a grill where the chef makes his magic. 
All the place was surrounded by a nice and warm atmosphere. That makes anybody feels a new level of pleasure, in the same process that everybody repeat every day, eat.

It was a sunny day, a special day in my life. The day was 29 October in 2009,that day I had a university admission test at Shaula university. Before this day I was frustrated,, so it brings a happiness in my mind. Very luckily, a beautiful girl sat on my bench. With talking her for a few minutes, I become too happy. In fact, I fall in love with her at first sight. So I was just thinking how to convince her. There was no other option for me, I just want her. During the exam time, I was thinking whole time how to communicate with her. When the examination is over, again I started to talk with her, asking how was your exam. She told me not good at all, but my was good, and she also added that you may get the chance, and finally I got it. After three days later our result has been published, and I got the chance, but the girl didn't. Then I become too much unhappy. I expected if both of us get the chance then it will be very good. But alas ! My dream didn't come true. When I was returning from Seth I called the girl and talk to her and assure that I got change in university, but girl says that she knew it.
Hi Duncan,

How are you? I hope that you are well. Please, give my congratulations to your cousin. I have my cousin's wedding the next month too, so I am very excited.

Well, the weddings in my country is usually celebrate in a church. The fianc¨¦e wear a long white dress and the fianc¨¦ wear a black suit. It is all very religious. A lot of people go to a wedding because it's a very important moment for the couple, normally about one hundred people. The food is always in a big restaurant where we eat the best food of the city, I recommend you to come a Spanish wedding.

I think that's all, I hope that it will helpful. 

Best wishes,

MARIO
Hello I'm Arnaud, and I am twelve years old, I live in Mares (Catalonia), I am very hardworking in the high school, and I¡¯m funny and very talkative, and I¡¯m not freaky.
I very tall (1,71 m) my face is normal, I have brown eyes, and black hair, my nose and mouth are normal.
I¡¯m really into PS3 especially FIFA 15, and fan of riding a bike, but I don¡¯t like computer games, they are very boring, but I like chatting on the internet with my friends, sometimes I like playing on my iPad 
In my free time I watch TV, I play PS3, I ride a bike and I sometimes play football in the¡° camp municipal de la mion¡±, and my hobby is running in the afternoon with my father. I spend money on clothes and I sometimes spend money on PS3 games,, but I spend some money on my bike.
Furthermore, I really want to meet boys and girls from different countries of the world, I¡¯m really interested in practicing English and I want to learn Chinese and Russian, I¡¯m really interested in learning languages, 
I really love languages !!!!!

The most beautiful museum in Mexico

Now, It is holidays, and we need, or we want to meet the places around the country. Well, I explain in this article about one museum that is considerate: "The Best in Mexico", but why? The answer is simply; this museum has many types of movies. In 1810 have been a war for independent of Mexico many people were fight with other people; for example: Miguel Hidalgo is considerate: "The father of independent" and he was to fight with Marquis Spanish. He gave the arms of all the city.  Later he was killed, and he rests in peace in this museum, the same other famous people in this war. The Museum is stayed in Guanajuato, Guanajuato. You should know about the prize for coming to the museum is very cheap ($15.00) for hour if you want to stay more time the prize increase in $10.00. The museum is the most interesting place in my country because describe our history about our country. 
 If you want to take photos the way free you can be done. Finally, you enjoy the museum with all the family, and you can invite some people from other city or other country.








Article written by Martina Alejandra Montero Pascal. Magazine: "OUR COUNTRY".
Football as a favorite sport
My favorite sport is football. I love football because it involves two team. Being a double team sport makes the game competitive and interesting. I am an Arsenal FC fan. Have been an arsenal fan since 1999. I love Ars¨¨ne Wenger. He is a good coach,, but he doesn't like to buy experienced footballer. Buying cheap football has wretched arsenal team several times because of lack of experience of the cheap player. 
  Football is an important sport that unite nations. It brings unity among country. People from different culture are playing in this same club. World cup unites the world. Football is indeed a union. 
Hello.
Mine was shuttle and am really enjoyed it when I was playing. It is one of the exercise for the body who will want to become thin. When am in the court, other side participants are fear to take off my service ball and am very at my position to cover the entire court. Coming to the infrastructure of the shuttle, it is all about the cock and the bats. The court contains 2 players or 4 players depends on the court. Each team contains 1 or 2 players. And the court contains one net in between those players. They can shut the cock above from the net. If that cock touches that net, it counts as a point to the other team who can receive from the cock 
At present, many people think that English is the world language, and it is absolutely an essential skill to communicate with other countries people. Due to this reason, Taiwanese parents do not want their kids to start behind others, thus, many kindergartens started to teach children English.

It's December. But in my city there is no snow. And it's soon bad. On the streets there is a little warm. About 9 degrees, I guess.
Yesterday it was very windy and 2 days ago it was filthy rain.
Yep, it's our weather. Not all Russia is always under snow.
Michael just felt nothing different, as usual. He was on his way to school.
He went through the park where children playing around. He saw some street performer by the street.
Everything seems so fine, and nothing is wrong anyway.
Michael is a college student majoring in music. He loves music so much that he turn down other courses just concentrating in music.
He learns how to composition and plays some kind of ancient instrument.
Professor says that Michael is gifted and talented. Michael may become a great musician someday.
Meanwhile Michael is also a guy of sensitive.
Michael saw a homeless guy on the street. At first, he just pretend as nothing happened.
After all, he changed his mind, he turned to give the guy some money.
He thinks that he did the right thing, then went back home.
Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
Television is one of the most useful inventions of the modern world. It is one such commodity which serves the dual purpose of both education and entertainment at one and the same time. 
The TV shows broadcasted on television play a vital role in shaping the thoughts of the viewers. 
 
I think, I can agree with the opinion, that shopping is not always enjoyable. In my opinion it is dependent on that, what we buy and with whom we go to the shopping. To tell the true, shopping is so bored to men, particularly when they go to the store with women. 
Shopping with women is nightmarish. They always run in the shops and can't choose anything. Then they are always crying and yelling like wild goats. When I'm listening to this, I want to commit Harari. 
No future for public transport?
Why do use public transport, some of us use it to save money for not buying gas, or they can't buy a car or if they had problems in their cars, or they don't have the mood to drive.
Nowadays with technology we have different ways to transport like hoverboards, skateboards, and maybe it makes No future for public transport 
Another point is we have our own cars, and it's more comfortable, I don't have to wait in line to buy tickets. I don't have to be late for the delays, I can do anything in my own car I can put music I can drink, eat,speak or wherever.
I don't have really an opinion, I just don't know. We will wait and find out. Tell me your opinions about this subject in comments.
My Favorite Sport. 
We are living in rush world. All of us have to choose some activity. In my opinion, it's having to be like brushing teeth. We do it for hygiene! My hygiene is running, or more familiar word is jogging. Run Forest Run! It is the simplest form of activity. Jogging has existed since the beginning of the earth. I can say that is the most natural move for human.  All that you need to become Runner its motivation and plan. That what was happened to me personally. Motivation for my bean 15k run competition. But I never before have worked our jogging. So to finish competition with pleasure I needed work out plan which is diary day by day about our jogging distance, time, mood during work out. First it is absolutely minimum, you just need boots to run! It is one main condition, rest of your dress are not important. Shoes are to protect and prevent your health, you have got only one body to look after them. I enjoyed my favorite sport because I feel better after Jogging I think better, and I meet lovely great people because of running. My advice is : eat a lot of vegetables and fruit, drink plenty of water, and run at least 3 times per week.  
 I will tell you a review of a thriller, the thriller is Hunger games it is about some capitals and people are choired and play on a game, you have to kill persons for they don't kill you, is a movie that have suspense because you want to know ho survey, in the movie someone love someone and protect each others, is very cute but on the 3 movies they are bad moments with the family, capitals, Friends, etc. But you will love the movie, and you will want to see others one, so go and watch that movie.
I would like to explain about the favorite sport, cricket. Cricket is a sport that have two teams of eleven players each.
I like very much cricket because, it gives immense pleasure while playing the cricket. We can enjoy cricket with our friends by playing cricket, and we can also have fun, entertainment.
Playing the cricket will also give physical exercise to our body. We can bowl, batt, field in the cricket which requires a lot of physical activities.
Playing the cricket will give relaxation and reduces stress.
I can give the advice to the people who are interested in the playing cricket, they must know the all rules in the cricket before playing it. 
My bedroom

My bedroom isn¡¯t very big and is untidy.
There are two desks with two computers, two chairs and two bookshelves with my brother¡¯s school books and mine.
There are three bunk bed next to wardrobes. There is a big window with curtains.
Finally, there are some posters and some shelf with my games.

My favorite sport is tennis.
This sport is an individual sport, then you win alone and don't win a team, but if you play tournaments in double the one who wins is the team. This sport is very famous all over the world, but in Italy isn't very famous, because in Italy the soccer is more famous than the tennis. But I know that a lot of young people play tennis, I hope that the Italian tennis player in a few years will be very famous all over the world, then you don't wait you sign up in a tennis club, and you will become a famous tennis player! If you start playing tennis you go to a famous tennis club, or you choose the best tennis mister, who will introduce the tennis, and you will the shots, including the forehand, the backhand, the smash and the service. So you will become one of the most famous player all over the world, and you will win a lot of tennis tournaments, including the four slam:the Australian Open, the US open, the Roland Barros and the Wimbledon.
Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately. In 2 hours, Mary's plane was leaving, and he had to go to the airport to stop her from going to Scotland. He had to tell her she was in danger. 
He went to the garage, and rode on his motorbike. It was a cloudy, rainy day and there was a lot of traffic. Though the road was wet and slippy, he rode his motorbike fast and skillfully, getting his way through the other cars and trucks. 
My favorite sport is soccer. I like to play soccer because it¡äs a great sport. It is great when you are in a cup and goes very far in the tournament. It is also really fun to be with everyone who is white in the team. When you're playing a cup you're playing really much football, and you are also very much with your friends. When you go far in a cup you got to play a lot of games. 
If you are going to begin playing football you need footballs shoes, you also need protections for the legs. If you're starting this sport, you need to think it¡äs funny to play it. If you don¡ät think it is a funny sport, you would not go to it. The best thing about football is that it's a fun sport to play. You should not play the sport just because your friends doing that, do it because you like to play.  
Dear Sir/ Madam, 
	I saw your ad in a newspaper. I'm a young guy who finished his study in tourism and ecology this year. I'm also a member of an avocation of tourism and ecology since I was 10 years old. Furthermore, I have traveled a lot and I have a lot of knowledge about travel. As well, I graduated a climbing course and I practiced climbing since I was 12 years old. I love to travel, and I know that I was born for it.
	I worked for few different companies and avocations in the past. Usually I was a volunteer, but I also was a part of few European Projects where I was paid for my work. 
	As a person I'm friendly, and I like to do my job.

 My best leisure time would be hanged out with my friends. L like to go to the beach with my friend or alone often. I enjoy watching people and children having fun. L like the cool breeze from the oaken while I'm walk along on the shore and listening to my favorite music.
Hi Alex I couldn't wait until I see you
I really think that we should go that new center that you wrote about in your last email and do some activities.
I would prefer to do the sailing on the river, because as you know I never learn how to ride a bike. But we could also try the climbing,, but it would be better if we could climbing outside, in the countryside.
Perhaps on Saturday night we could watch a horror movie, as we both love, or comedy. However, if we not too tired at the time we could go out.
I will really like if my parents could take me to your house on Friday evening,, but I think that we have a party that night. But I will try to convince they.
See you soon.
The future of public transport is one of the key issues large cities have to face. Citizens want at the same time efficient and quick means of transportation, personalized solutions to meet their transportation needs, and the cheapest transportation cost.
Hi, Isabel.

How are you? I hope you're ok. I have some to tell. Furthermore, I have been living in New York City!! Furthermore, I used to live in Canc¨²n, but for my job I had changes me city. This place has some restaurants and sport bar's when I can talk with Latinos and I feel at home.

Email me soon and let me know how you are getting on next holidays.

See you soon. Kisses.
I think that public transport is much better for the environment than the private. 
If the people travelled more often in public transport we wouldn¡ät pollute so much. 
I think that public transport is the future because many countries will have to allow the entrance in their towns to private cars for stop the CO2 emissions to the atmosphere in order to protect the planet and the health of their citizens. So I do not agree with this affirmation, in me opinion travelll by car is much more expensive and harmful to the environment than public transport.
My favorite sport is running. I run every day. When I was running, I feel relax on it. That is the reason why I love running so much. Moreover, when I was running, I can through a lot of things about myself or how to solve some problem from daily. Therefor, running can let me feel happy.

Would you like me to help you ?
There isn¡¯t any animal on the farm. That is hardly surprising, it is close since 2005. You¡¯ll have to take the cow by the horns and get some work done !

In the future, people will go out of the Earth. Because of the damage, people on the ground can't survive. When they want to find foods, there will be nothing. Even of the grass can't alive on earth. Thought, but most people do not be the member of the team of alive. Cause of lots of damage, but they didn't take responsibility. I wonder for sixteen years. And I don't know if they were to change their mind in after the next fifty years. 
Firstly, I agree about learning different concepts because you can analyze different opinions. It's not necessary to say the same words. But you need, understand the main idea. In other words, some professor when teaches different topics they explain the concepts, and it's difficult to learn. Sometimes it's so difficult to say the same words for the students. I recommend read different ideas. Anyway, if you read different books, you can understand better. In conclusion, it's very important to learn the concept than saying something stupid.... So, if you need techniques for learning you need to analyze and create your own words, this way you will never forget this definition. 
. All about me
Hi my name is Leon Johnson, I am 13 years and I live in Stocks Sweden. I was born at Dangerous hospital, 2003 5:TH September.

I have one sister who are ten years old and one brother who are five years old. Furthermore, I spend most of my spare time playing ice hockey and golf. 
One of the best place I ever visited is Leland in Malaria. (It is my country place) I like it because it is near the water, and we have a big lawn where we play football, volleyball and have fun. Three words that describe me is: Sporty, friendly and happy.

One of my favorite books are Diary of a Wimpy Kid.
I like almost all music, but right now I listen to Calvin Harris most of the time.
My favorite subjects at school are mathematics, geography, and of course English.
The location of the restaurant is fantastic, just in the center of the city, and with plenty of space for parking.
Decoration is not too modern, but not too classic, it has a comfortable atmosphere.
The menu BS very well constructed, and food is based on local products.
Prices are more than good if you consider the high quality of the dishes.
Dear Carlos Hotel,
I am writing this letter because we need to improve the facilities in the gym.

In the gym they are many people. The days that we have to do sports if the weather is good we do it outside but if the weather is bad we have to do in the gym. That day we are many people and classes at the same time, and sometimes we can't have the class comfortably.
Apart from this problem, we have another problem that it is important too. This problem is that some apparatus are broken and the paint is bad.

For me, the solutions to that`s problems are era. In the first problem, you have to organic the timetable in order to have 1 class in each time4. And the solution for the second problem is that you have to do maintenance fans a year.

I hope your positive awnser to me.
Yours sincerely, Maximiliano Khachaturian.
 Mrs Gate

I'm so glad to hear from you, and I also would like you to know that your idea to our new school project is fascinating. I am excited about the idea to be with and interview other students from different parts of the world.
On June 21st Is impossible for me because I have an appointment with Mr Set, my dentist. Can we set the meeting for the next week?

Hope to hear from you soon

Anna
In the last year sales at Benton Electronics were in the first quarter of the year 500 and increased to 620 in the second quarter, in the third quarter sales maintained in 620 and in the last quarter of the year sales went down very quickly to 420, as you can see sales were very unstable.
I just want to express about what I think painful, and I think coming back to your own home after many years of parting and seeing your closest person have departed is the most painful feelings ever.
Good evening, my name is Lydia, I am a newcomer of IAS.
I am a local from Taipei.
It¡¯s my pleasure to be part of you here, my major is actually not relevant to social Sciences, I really want to learn more about the research methodology of social sciences. I think it will be helpful to me taking this lesson at the beginning of the semester, I believe I can learn a lot from the professor and you guys.
Thank you!


Jogging the sport in the nature

My favorite sport is jogging. During I go jogging, I can think about all the daily thing in my life. When I am in a bad mood, I go jogging outside and hear how the birds singing. For me, jogging is very stressless. 

At one day I go alone for me, so I can calm down or think through. At another day, I go jogging with my best friend, so we talk a lot and have fun while we do sport.

Jogging is a sport you can start it every day. You don't need a lot of equipment, so you don't have to buy a lot.
I think for people who are fat, they can go jogging but a little slower. 

You have to notice that and go tomorrow jogging. It is never too late to start.

Have fun!
It is a hot summer's day and Agatha has just switched off the computer of her office for coming back home.
Suddenly Agatha sees, behind the windows, a 30 years' man, he's tall and wears 19th century clothes; he is John, a known vampire who lives in that district.
He was gone in Agatha's investigation office for asking her to look into some murders happened recently.
It was murdered four vampires.
Agatha knows that John is a dangerous man, so she decides to refuse the charge.
Unhappy, John insists until Agatha accepts.
After the agreement, Agatha come back home and in first place she calls her friend Michael for telling him to go to her.
When he arrives, she tells him the event.
Michael, that is a policeman, decides to help her.
Two weeks later, Agatha meets John in the old palace's undergrounds.
Convoyed by Michael, she goes to him and gives him all the documents found.
Unfortunately, Agatha can't find sufficient trials for understanding the guilty.
Irritated, John knows the Agatha's difficulties and before to go away, he calls Agatha without Michael for telling her another important thing.
While Michael goes out, in John's eyes comes a red touch.
Michael closed the door and knew at the moment he had made a mistake.
We had taken lunch, so we started a little walk. Then, we saw an eagle flying in the sky. We had never seen such a beautiful eagle like that. Charlie thought that if he was taller, he might be able to take a picture. Therefore, he climbed a tree. Suddenly, when he was trying to focus the eagle with the camera, he fell down. 
There are several reasons why there is no future for public transport. One reason is that travelling by car is more comfortable. If you share your own car with other people, you will save money. Another reason is that you can hear the music that you like in your car. For all these reasons, I think that travelling by car is better.
My name is Monika, and I'm 21 years old. I'm from Poland and live in Poznan.
I have a lot of interest,, but my favorite is volleyball.
Volleyball is a discipline which I practice for 6 years. 
An important place in my country is the Museum of Prado because it is complete with much world fame painters.
It's very large and has special lights for Greek performers room mainly.
This museum save the historical collection of the Spanish royal family a lot of centuries ago to actual time.
You can see there some of the greatest teachers painters. 


The car is very easy 
I have a car and can go a lot of places, because it is fast.
The public transport is slow and have got much people. I prefer to walk, because the bus, helicopter, metro is very polluting.
The pollution is the first problem for the public transport
Long time ago, in a small village in Spain happened a story I'm going to tell you.
A man called Michael gave us a new machine to wash up our clothes. He was trying to switch it on again and again,, but the machine didn't work.
Suddenly, a man in black told us if we were putting the machine into the electricity. Michael face was awfully red. He was very embarrassed. 
Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
Good morning everyone and welcome to your favorite program" you can also do so ", today we're going to learn how to make a cake for the birthday of children, as well as Sofia please tell us what ingredients we are going to need to be able to make the cake. Hello John good days and what we need to, do this delicious cake is: eggs, flour, yeast, sugar, and flavor of the cake that we want such as chocolate, vanilla, fruit

While I was ringing the bell, the neighbor's dog stared to bark. It looked like afraid and nervous. It was like whether it was waiting for a terrific event.  I stayed in front of the door during forty minutes and I rang again and again. Nobody opened. I had called Michael that morning and I told him that I will go to his house that evening. I would suppose that he was waiting for me. Furthermore, I look through the Windows and I could see a suspicion shadow. Furthermore, I thought he might be Michael and I became to shout his name. When Michael saw me he opened the door, however straightaway closed the door and at that moment knew he had made a mistake

Dear Sir/Madam,

I am writing to you to apply to the position of Summer camp as advertised in the newspaper.

I am an Architect, I have 5 years of professional experience. Furthermore, I am also part of a charity organization in my local town, we 
There are many sports and my favorite sport is badminton. I had liked it when I was young. I remember that the first present my mother gave me was the badminton racket. I was really surprised. Because I don't know how to use it. From that day, my older brother taught me to play with it. I often play it about 2 hours in the afternoon. And now, if a day I don't have any practicing, I will feel bored. I see that it's good for my health. It helps me be stronger and more active. As you know, practicing in the sports give us many benefits, you can take part in a club and have more friends. Moreover, if you have a good ability, you can attend in a competition to try your best. I am a member of Badminton club in the city, if you're interested in badminton, let's come and enjoy yourself.
Dear Anne,
thanks your letter asking about the Young people are interested.
Saying that, the music that they like is pop music and reggaeton as they can dance together. Also, the television programs that they watch are the reality show. These programs are fashionable. Moreover, regarding the clothes, the Young people wear a dress skirt and jeans. Everyone wears that he wants.
See you soon,
Fatima 
My nightmare journey was taking place in August of two thousand and eleven year. My family and I were backing for the holiday that we're spending at the seaside. We were going to Gdansk to seeing new stadium that was built for UEFA European Championship. We were sawed the stadium, backed to car and wanted to drive to Bydgoszcz. Bydgoszcz is my family city and destination of this journey.
 Sadly, our car was crushed... in a big and busy intersection! This wasn't some big, we still had four wheels and motor, but electronics in the car stopped worked. This was very scared! We weren't had speedometer, blinkers and lights, it was very dangerous situation. We were stopped on the side and looked for a solution. My father was rung for friends, but unfortunately no one could help us. We must take risk and went to the nearest market. In parking in front of this building, very nice and crazy old man was helped us and charged accumulator in our car. This was worked and we could back to drive. We were very scared because the car could crush again at any moment. For this reason, we weren't using a freeway.
 Fortunately we were backed to home healthy and happy but very, very tired.

To pursue a career which is relevant to Mechanical field and expect myself to contribute my experiences and knowledge with enthusiasm and would love to take challenges and be yearning for the sense of accomplishment.
My town tries all the time to make our town more beautiful and comfortable by taking more care of the environment, they provide us by good buses which are friends to the environment and offer the tickets for these buses in a cheap price, they also trying to find the best way to make the rubbish more useful by the recycling, also the people tries all the time to find the best way for keep our village clean;they never throw the rubbish in the streets or the gardens, also they take care of the fuel in their cars to not be bad for the environment, so,it's our duty to take care of our village and the whole environment beside the government.
There are many accidentally problems encountered by international students studying in Australia. It is believed that the most important one of the problem is culture barrier. Because of different culture backgrounds, the talking style of international students who come from different countries are various. Meanwhile, different countries have different rules. For example, people always walk on the right of the road in China. However, Australian¡¯s rule specify citizen drive on the left of the road. Secondly, loneliness would be a big problem when a person who leave their own country, getting away from family members and close friends. Thirdly, students can¡¯t be accustomed to western eating habits like burgers, pizza and bread. According to the unfamiliar environment, students may lack the sense of security. There will evaluate viable solutions to the problem. The most important way is that individuals should participate in student activities which held by the students from the same nationality so that they may not feel lonely. At the same time, they can also actively communicate with local students to acquire more information about Australia culture in order to suit quickly.
To whom it may concern,

 My name is Margarita Varela, and I¡¯m interested in the Summer camp Assistant's job position. I am in my last year of a Visual Arts major. I have a special interest in arts and crafts. Furthermore, I am a responsible person who can cope in crisis. I took a first aid course last year in order to know what to do in case of unexpected accidents. Also, I have good sociable skills and can speak two languages, English and Spanish. My available time is on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.

Then, I was wondering if food, accommodation and expenses are covered by you, or do you give any kind of help to your employees? I will appreciate a lot to send me this information. I look forward to hearing from you. 

Kind regards,

Margarita Varela

A game of gentlemen is my favorite game, yes I mean cricket. In my country, we follow cricket as a religion. Cricket is played by 11 players, which includes a captain, a wicket keeper and rest batsman and bowler. A player who can bat and bowl is called an all-rounder. This game is played in three format i.e. Test Cricket (5 day game), One day Cricket and Twenty-Twenty.

Test cricket is an old format and I love this format as it really tests the players skills and only best player can get success in this format. But as this takes 5 days, many people don't have time to watch this game and it's loosing its popularity in young generation.

One day cricket is played often.
My favorite sport is football. I think, this game is the most enjoyable. Its popularity spreads all over world too. There are many reasons behind it to be popular. Everyone is able to enjoy the excitement throughout of this game, the session. The people who is a eager to play football must follow some basic rules, which are described below:
1. A football player should be punctual and hard-working.
2. He should be disciplined.
3. During his playing time, he sought to give his full concentration.
 

Hi, I'm sanguine. Do you have any Different eating customs?
If you have any specially eating customs, will you tell me?
Because, It's my project. So. I need more information about eating customs Different country's.
In Korea, we usually UES Chopsticks when we eat Meal ALD spoon as well.
Have you ever used Chopsticks? It may be difficult for you. When I was young, I couldn't use it. So, I have to Land to use Chopsticks to eat.
Also. We Have Meal Manners. When we have meal, We can't eat before your parents also older people start to eat.
We think it's Important meal manners.
Well. Have you ever heard Stamina food?
When you feel is really Pusillanimous. Then? We eat special stamina food.
We have much stamina food, I think dogs meat is good stamina food than another meats.
Because, When I was young, My parents Needed it for me every summer Seasons. And they said it's a perfect for your health.
So, every summer I have been eating it for 12?years.
I have to Presentation this project next Monday. So, tell me as soon as possible. In your country's specially eating customs and manners also stamina food as well.

Hi,
I think that for people who want learning English Write and Improve it is great! I like it very much, it is very useful for me. I tried it last weekend and I will use it all days!  If I used that every day, I would improve in a short time!
 Thank you for that advice.
Chiara 
There is no doubt that the man's lives are evolved. All thanks to new creations technologies, the innovation in the field of medicines and the new scientific discovered. To my mind our lives has been improved in these years by smartphone, satnav, digital TV, Internet. Let's suppose a teenager of twenty-first century during the Middle Ages. Don't get out alive without Wi-Fi! 
First in the next 50 years the people's life don't resemble at all this. As far as I'm concerned we would be submerged by too many tools which will replace manpower and craft, in addition the globalization will lose cultural traditions of each country. On the one hand I'm for development, on the other hand I would that the innovations will not destroy the old. 
Often the evolution is return of origins, however I hope that the man in the next years will be to don't forget the past.
Apart from that, I imagine the world with everything automatic, planes that took me from New York to Dubai in three hours and robot instead of the waters in a restaurant.
To conclude I can't think which wonderful thing the man will do in spite I hope to make the word even better!

Hi there,
  
I am writing to apply for the job of camp organizer.
I have read the advertisement and I promise you that I am the perfect for this post. Furthermore, I'm a veteran camper 
and I know how to take care of a camp. I'm funny and cheerful,, but I'm also professional, so I know how to take care of the children. Furthermore, I am an experienced cooker, so I can also cook for the children, I am also a good singer, so we can sing songs together with the children.

So tell me what you think and let me know.

I'm looking forward to hearing from you.

Your friend,
            Peter Hansen

I cannot agree with the statement of "no future for public transport" provided that the premise is "travelling by car is more convenient".

First, the public transport is more rather convenient than irate car. The subway reaches most part of the London, and people can travel many places. The accessibility is not just improving underground, but also on the ground and bridging.

Therefore, public transport will have a brilliant future.
The environment is becoming a more and more burning issue, especially from many years to nowadays. That¡¯s because pollution has now reached critical levels, and that¡¯s why we must take it under control and solve it.
We already know that a great part of the pollution comes from the exhaust fumes of the transports that invade cities worldwide. However, we can already fight this ¨C waiting the developing of advanced technology which can better exploit renewable, sustainable energy.  ¨C for example, taking advantage of public transports. The best idea is still, obviously, valorizing the use of bicycles. 
Apart from that, even greater is the pollution of seas and rivers. Polluting them is like endangering the life of the whole world. This is caused by the waste of factories, but also by the damages that tankers do not only to the sea, but to the mainland too.
In addition, what about domestic wastes, which are our reality? We should all learn to manage our wastes, because each of us, in our own small, is great damage for the environment. 
In conclusion, I think it is never too late for saving our wonderful world. Why not do it now?

Hello Joe
It's good to hear from you! Well, in my hometown, there is about a little more than half a million people. The nicest places to go are the malls, because of the very hot weather. But if you leave the city about 30 km, there are a lot of rivers and waterfalls. 
My best regards!
Thais
When you have skill to read a book and At that moment you are searching for good job you can find a lot of jobs because you can develop easy when you compare with another person that they have been searched job to

My favorite restaurant is situated in Modulo. It¡¯s placed in a quiet street, so the restaurant is often very relaxing, especially between 8 and 9 pm.
	The furniture consists in a set of chairs, tables and some sofas, covered with red clothes. The restaurant appears very elegant and traditional.
	Usually, there is no music in the restaurant. The owner prefers to leave on only the TV, but often the dining room is silent. In this way, customers can have the chance to have a conversation, without being annoyed by television or music. I find it appreciable: I really love to talk to the people I¡¯m eating with.
	Despite this, the restaurant is decorated with a full set of musical instruments, hanged up to the walls. I really like it, because I love music and I enjoy trying to guess which instrument I¡¯m looking to.
 You can eat different types of pizza, starters and pasta there. Everything is delicious and very tasting, especially pizzas: they dress them in many ways: I try a different meal every time I go there. At last, it is not expensive at all.

Hello camps! 
I am Montana Tomato, and I am twenty-four years.
I read this news, now. 
I am interested in the work. I am studying primary education because I love children. Furthermore, I would like to play with the children, to practice sport, and we can dance with them.
Furthermore, I could help in the kitchen, too. Furthermore, I love to cook. My best dishes are chicken and omelets.
I hope that we could work together.
I promise that if I go to camps, we would have a good time, and we laugh a lot of.
Hi Luke, I tried the program called Write and Improve for a week and I liked it. Although I don¡ät have a teacher available there, the program helps a lot because the corrections appear at the same time you check it. I intend to write every day to practice my writing. I believe that it's a good thing to share to everyone. You should shout it from the rooftops!
In our earth, Hundreds of millions people living in here. Except us, There are also many wildlife. All of us need air\water and food. Humans in life also want house, And transport facilities. A great number of buildings stand in land, Even the please probably should belong to animals. We build road to us and make the life easy and better. However, we forget the one important thing, The earth is belonged to all life.
Our flat and house make theater animals lost they are home, and it is lead to environmental determination. We take the transport easy, however, we take away other animal's life in careless.
THE PERSON I ADMIRE IS MY BROTHER, HE IS THE OLDER THAN MY BROTHERS, HE WAS BORN IN 1970, MY PARENTS TELL ME "HE IS a GOOD BOY" WHEN HE WAS A CHILDREN.
THE REASON WHY I ADMIRE HIM, BECAUSE HE WAS DETERMINED WHEN HE WON A SCHOLARSHIP A STUDY MEDICINE IN RUSSIA, HE LIVED FOR 7 YEARS. HE HAD TO LEARN ANOTHER LANGUAGE AND LIVE IN A COUNTRY VERY DIFFERENT TO OUR. 
MY PARENTS AND MY ARE FELLING PROUD FOR HIM.
NOW, HE IS THE BEST MEDICAL INTERNAL, HE HAS A BEAUTIFUL FAMILY.
I'm living in Taiwan, Taichung. How is the area to take care of the environment? It builds a lot of facilities for residents. For example: Lots of Bicycles. This provides people who want to go to a place that distance is not too long.  And it faces another question: morality. People probably destroy those bikes, and cause bikes become less and less. But, fortunately, people living in this area all use these bikes carefully, so we don't care so much that a thing. The second facility is public bus. Large of bus all around the city. When students finish their class, they take but to home. Worker are off duty, taking bus to home, too. And when the weekend is coming. Family can take the bus to place, instead of driving. It makes father or mother more convenient! Third, lots of green area. Taichung has plenty of tree at the park. So when children are playing around these tree, they can feel more healthy with pure air. And that's talk about the bigger area, Taiwan. Taiwan has a complete traffic system. Train, bus, Mass Rapid Transit, and air plant. People living in Taiwan, no matter whether you are local people or not, you can use all of these facilities. And lots of city government advocate protecting animals.
Good afternoon USA SUMMER CAMPS committee

I am Julia Zimmerman from the Netherlands and I read your advertisement for working in summer camps in the USA.

I really would enjoy doing this job in the summer because I love to look after children, learn things to them and sport with them. Since I was 13 I've been teaching children from 8-9 years old how to play hockey and I am still doing and enjoying this. 

I also would like to do this because I have always been wanting to visit the United States and I love to sport. 
I can work really hard if it's needed and am very energetic, so I think and hope I am the suitable person for the job and I would really enjoy the job and look after children.

Kind regards,
Julia Zimmerman, The Netherlands
It was directed by Richard Curtis.
This movie is called "About Time".
The main character is Tim.
When he was 21 year old, his father told him something about his family's secret.
It's a quite strange sounds, because his father, grandfather, and great grandfather had been to travel time.
He couldn't believe that.
But it's so simple. Go to a dark place, and then check the fist.
After the action, he can go to the time in the past.
After he knew the truth, he moves to London for his job.
He tried to go out with her. So he used to his ability to travel time for his family.
Finally, he married to Marry.
After the married, He and his family face a difficult situation.
He always to fix the problem, but his father says to him.
If you have a great time with your family and co-worker, it is not necessary to travel time.
Just enjoy your day by day, and thankful an ordinary day.
He realized that's means.

I watched this movie several times, after I arrived in the UK.
It's good for studying English as well as the plot.
If you like a good drama, you will love it.
I'm sure, you would be like this movie.
A lot of people use public transport every day in this world, but some people prefer to use your own car to go to the work, school, and whatever. Some people have your own car, but prefer to use public transport.
Today in the streets have a lot of cars, bus, motorcycle, other kind of transportation. All the people should use your own car to go somewhere just when it's necessary, because each car on the street is bad to our environment.
All the people should use public transport to reduce the number of the cars on the street
I know a good restaurant .its name "moon light" it is locate din Abbas leaked st. It is large, clean and comfortable and has air conditioning and internet Wi-Fi 
it introduces many kinds of delicious foods like meat, cheeked, seafoods and if you want anything different you will find it there .it is suitable for my class because it is difference from any other restaurant 
In my city there is an old town who was declared in 1986 World Beautiful City. One of the most own building is the Church Earl Palace, who has a medieval tower with the battlements (the rest of the towers in the city does not have IR because the Muslims took them out).
 As well, is important because during DE Civil War, the General Franco was living there for a week. There is an office with so many things that he had there. If you want, you can visit it.
 
Nowadays, the Palace has a very good restaurant with a comfortable patio where you can taste the most exclusive products from Extremaduran. 
The present chapter aims to introduce audiovisual translation (AT) - one of the most popular type of translation nowadays. Audiovisual translation brings a lot of dilemmas and constraints with which translators must agonize. But it exists a variety of techniques which helps to tackle with this kind of problems.  So, I will elaborate on this subject. The chapter will also cover the definition of the notion of pun a stylistic figure and how puns transfer from one language into another. In extension of this, I will evaluate whether the effect of the pun in the original version is maintained in the dubbing version.
I live in Serious. The people in my town take care of the environment. The garbage cans are about each home.  Garbage truck pick up them twice on the week. There are many small garbage cans about caf¨¦, stores, and other public place. Every morning special track to clean the roads and walk way. 
The advance of technology in the last years has been awesome. The first computers was created in 1946 for John W. Muchly and J. Prosper Eckert in the United States. In 1960, computers were very basic. They were bigger and heavier than today,, and they were very expensive. Its keyboard had a lot of buttons and its screen didn't have any colors. Computers didn't have any programs and resulted limited, boring and tedious. In the present, computers are multifunctional. For example, they have Internet access. Wi-Fi, port USB, among other things. These computers are very popular. They are faster and smaller than before,, and you need a mouse to use it. Its screen has colors and HD
Hi Maxi!
How are you?
In my last week went to Florida with my family. I went to the beach and played volleyball with my brother and sister. Then there went to the cinema and saw the Harry Potter film. My brother went to the NBA league and see the match the Arenas vs Orlando And now I go to my house and then I¡äm going to invite friends. Tomorrow I'm going to play soccer with my friends. 
See you next weekend!



 IGNACIO
In my opinion, the public transport has future because this is cheaper than other transport, also its pollution is lower. The car is transport more comfortable than the public transport but is not sustainable, its cost is higher and if all people move by car, The cities will be very pollutes.
Also, in the big cities, the public transport is more punctual than the car because this transport usually has its own lane, while if you use the car, you take more because there are a lot of traffic in your lane.
Other transport that can be very used in the future is the bike, this transport is cheap and ecological, also, more and more the cities are building a lot bike lane so is a good alternative.
For travelling other cities or town, in my opinion, the car will remain the transport most used, although the new transports could change this situation.
For the finish, I think that the transport most use in the cities in the future will be the bus, metro and bike and for travelling to enter cities the car will remain the most used.
Dear James!
Thank you for inviting me there! It was really enjoyable and funny. I was especially delighted with national music and Latin American dances. I would like to invite you to the celebration of my birthday in two weeks.
Bye!
Your dear, Vitaly
There is no future for public transport, because travelling by car is so much more convenient.  Now a day, more and more people have their own car.  When they go out for work or other purposes, they choose to drive by themselves.  People don't need to wait for public transport if they were driving their own cars.  It is not only convenient but also time saving.  With these benefits, it seems that there will be less and fewer people willing to take the public transport. 


Dear sir,

I am writing to you about the advertisement on the Mirror daily.

I am really very interested in the job of your summer camp, I have worked during seven months in Spain in a similar job.

Furthermore, I can speak several languages like Spanish, English and Russian.

By the time I have studied a degree in journalism.

I am available to start to work immediately.

I'm looking forward to hearing from you soon.

Your faithfully.

Rama
My favorite sport is football. I play this sport since I was a child, and today I still love it.
The dream of every person that play this sport, as well as a hobby, is to make it a profession, but very few people did it.
Nowadays, I play football twice a week, Monday and Friday, because for me, it is remained one hobby. I like to play football cause for me, as well as one hobby, is one way to stand out of the world, of the problem that every day I have to face, and at the end it makes me calm and happy.
I recommend this sport to all people, because it could be, for me, one moment to distract from the world, one moment to spend without thinking about tomorrow. 
The football could be one way to meet your friends, and to spend time with them. Trust me, I'll be right. 
My undergraduate studies in Pharmacy at the University of Asia Pacific gave me a solid background in health care sector and chemistry, as well as a strong theoretical framework, while allowing me to explore my personal interests in pharmaceutical technology. This undergraduate work along with the diversified professional experience helped shape the specific research interests that now drive me to pursue graduate work in the field of Industrial pharmacy and gave me the opportunity to learn and work with the new medicines and delivery ensuring their safety and quality academic and research opportunities for my interest in pharmaceutics as a scientific career.
Dear Kennedy 

I am very grateful for your invitation to the interview. I am glad to tell you that I am able on February 16th at 10:00am. Furthermore, I will appreciate if you could reserve a parking space for me. Could you please tell me how long will be the interview?

Kind regards
Andr¨¦s Fern¨¢ndez 
I Live in Egypt. It has a lot of historical places. The most historical place is the Pyramids, they were built since more than 7000 years ago. If any tourist decide to visit the Pyramids, he/she shall enjoy riding Camel, horses or buggy.
Also, having some pictures will be a great idea. The pyramids are famous because of the way they are built, it was a great job by the Egyptians.
Great Wall is a great military construction in China, as known as a miracle in the history of ancient human construction.  The exiting Great Wall remains mainly built in the 15th century of Ming Great Wall with a total length of 8851.8 kilometers.  It is a symbol of China, along with Tiananmen Square and Terra Gotta Warriors and Horses.  It was listed as a world heritage site in December 1987.

The area of Great Wall has been inhabited with many ethnic groups since ancient.  The development of each nation and their relationship is the key point by observing and understanding the area of the Great Wall.

This week was a little difficult because it was the beginning of classes, I got up early to be on time for my classes and to start with all the enthusiasm in the new semester. The next day, on Tuesday, was hard for me to get up, but the simple fact of seeing my classmates it was so much easier. I arrived at the school with all the energy, and I decided that this semester will be better than the other. Thus, the classes have just begun with new teachers and others who have already taught me. What heavy was that teachers have already given us all homework for the week. Later, I went to my house with my mom and I helped her make the meal and did the cleanup. After that, I did my homework because I had a lot of, and it was pretty hard. So every day I kept awake. My dad told me do your best and if this semester going well for me, my dad will give me a tablet because I really need it. So this is my week. However, on Saturday I went to English classes in the evenings. Later, my parents, my brother and I went to turn around to relax us from all the stress of the week. Finally, on Sunday, I rested at home with family.
Every second, every day, every week, every year, the life goes on and the human discovers a new thing. The scientists try to make people's life easier, but that's harmful for people's health because that make people don't move and more fat. 
In the future, The cars will fly and be faster. We won't use oil as a fuel. We will find a new resource for energy which will be clean and cheap. The renewable and new energy is clean and so cheap, we can use the sun rays to generate electricity for houses and cars. The computers will write what you think in, the mobiles will be smaller and less weight. The tourists will travel to another plants, The people will live at moon and under seas or oceans. 
Working as an ITC is very exciting because you need to program all, is like a challenge, although you can do varied things. You can be in duty in your house and deal with your boss in the cellphone, so don't be alarmed if your son's bother you. It is a little stressful when you have a lot of work. I hope when I have me job to be in charge of security IT department. It's a very worthwhile job.
I agree with that opinion because I don't like shopping at all. I think it's very silly when you go to the store, and you have no money. But you want to see all goods and maybe buy one of the product. It looks very stupid. But if you have much money, you can go and by something from the fact that you really need. Everyone has an opinion on this statement. There is no accounting for tastes, and I can not answer for everyone. 
 I don't know my name.I don't know my age all I know about that I want to be a great woman, I want the world to hear my voice, to prove that I can do it I can do anything I am not weak I have woman power 
Michael went into the teacher office, but he found that his teacher isn't here, maybe teacher went to the bathroom, suddenly,the door is opened by teacher, a teacher who wore bikini came into sight, this incident came as quite a surprise to Michael, she flirted with Michael, Michael felt excited but run out of the office, but he had regret for his action, Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.

Dear Bob, 

I am so glad to write this letter for you. I had been worked at local cinema last summer. Furthermore, I would like to tell you this experience and how I enjoy working in there. As you know, my hobby is gone to movie,, so you can image that how happy I am when I got this job. I am responsible for selling the move ticket and have a good time. How about you?

Best regards, and look forward to your reply.

Bill

Dear Mrs Kate Ashby
I am writing in connection with the advertisement for a job in Green Pepper Caf¨¦.
I would like to get this job and I think I would be suitable for it.
I own all needed traits for this job: knowledge in cuisine, politeness and diligence of work. 
In additions, I want to say that I always try to do all my duties with responsibility.
I am looking forward to hearing from you if you are interested in my application.
Sincerely,
Kim Page.
Once upon a time, a young boy called Michael, was walking opposite of a beautiful lake. When, he saw into the water, he found a little ill frog. After that, Michael decided to bring it up because the frog was very ill. 

The frog got well while I was at home for two months. However, Michael discovered that it was a bad wizard. The wizard attacked him, and he went away from home. Michael closed the door and new at that moment he had made a mistake because he lost his house. 
It was a sunny and hot day, Peter decided to go to the waterfront promenade and have a walk.
He was feeling so free because of the fresh air.
Suddenly, he heard a high-pitched scream.
Then he saw a woman started to jump over the enclosure !
Peter thought that he must do something quickly to avoid her from committing suicide.
He shouted out loud for help, but no one was around him.
So he contacted the police for help immediately.
In a flash of an eye, the police came.
At last, the life of the woman was saved by the police and the police thanked Peter for confirming them.
The one I most admire is called Ronaldinho, a football player that in my opinion is the best of all time. He won only one golf ball, but he should have won more than that. He mostly played with number 10 even though he also played with numbers 80, 45.
Furthermore, he was born in Porto Alegre, in 1980, and played in several teams like Barcelona or AC Milan. The skills he makes are wonderful, he knows everything about football, his passes were fantastic, he passed the ball even with the back !
Even though most of the people think that Messi or Ronaldo Mazarin are even better than him, other people think same as me.
There are 3 bedrooms and 3 bathrooms. The kitchen looks like small and simple. The living room shares an area with the dining room. We have a small garden. My mom likes growing plants such as vegetables.
It all started when I found a book on the bus. This book made me interesting and I'm begging reading more and more while I read the more I love it this time everything did not matter to me, I want to finish the book as soon as possible I do not know the end, but I want the end of the book was amazing but the same time I do not finish the book because the mystery to open up finished in. In the end, a lady interrupted me, and I was angry about the situation. That was the reason I do not finish the book 
Nowadays, our world is fighting every day against different problems, one day there is the problem of violence, one day the atmosphere conditions or many others. Today we can try to imagine how our lives can change in the next 50 years, if it will be better or worse. In my opinion, everyone's life will have a great improvement, from the economic point of view but also from the social and cultural one. It is known that in the future will come the day in which any kind of renewable resource will finish. But I imagine that in the next years we can begin to spread the use of alternative resources, as the electricity given by the light of the sun rays. Or in addition, we can use the energy given by the environment, as the wind or the inorganic rest. Maybe there will be also great new discoveries from the medicine that will make disappear any kind of diseases. To sum up, I think that we have to expect a great future in which men will regain possession of his whole capability and thanks to it, he will change everyone's lives in best.

Today I was at the university to learn new things. My friends are Mariana, Cristina, Fernando, Jose, Pedro and Ivan. They are good people. Mariana loves Panda songs. Cristina really likes dogs also she is too pretty. Fernando is a young man, he likes to hear English music. Jose is not in my university,, but we are good friends. Pedro is a good friend, he loves to read books, and he is working with your mother. Ivan is from Mariachi, he is not studying anything,, but I am sure that he is a great person. We are from Ecuador and live in Chibcha. 

I am from Ecuador and live in Mariachi. Mariachi is a nice town. I am 20 years old. When I was a child, I wanted to be doctored. Two year ago, I won a nice cap. I have 6 people in my house. We came from Lola to live in Mariachi. I grow up in Mariachi. I like to travel. Last mouth I went to Machalilla National Park with my friends. It is a free park. Los Friezes is in Machalilla National Park, It is a wonderful beach, the sand is too white. I really love that beach.
 I'm interested in sport;football. Because it's the most common sport all over the world as well as I'm good at football, so I play football with my friends every weekend always play on Tuesday evening. Also, it's good for fit and health. 
  I'd like giving you some advice about how to start playing sport. I think its good idea if you buy some kits for football and training with your friend before match at home or playground for two or three days. Next, you can play with anyone on confident and control match. Moreover, sometimes why don't you run in the morning? In my opinion, it's useful to play football.
 THANKS 
I understand what you mean because cars are so convenient as you said. You can go anywhere, anytime you want. You don't need to care about timetables. Also, during your journey, you might be able to stay the night in your own car. But nowadays, cars are one of the reasons to cause the earth warming and air pollution. Car companies try to spread electric cars,, but it seemed to take a long time. And some people have already switched to use public transport like trains or buses. Moreover, it's still popular to travel long journey with trains or ships because the scenery you can see from them are totally different from the one from cars. According to these reasons, I don't think there is no future for public transport.
"Annabelle" is a horror movie which I am going to watch this Saturday. I am wondering if I will be scared after the movie. The movie is about a doll called Annabelle which was closed in a museum from Connecticut where she is visited by a priest who blesses her twice a month. John From finds the perfect gift for his pregnant wife :a beautiful collection doll dressed in a wedding dress. Unfortunatelly, in a horrible night the couple's house was invited by a satanist group who attack them and leave just blood behind them. The satanists invoked an eaves entity that is capable of the worst things... Annabelle. After Mia gives birth to her daughter Lilly, Annabelel wants to kill her. Even the priest doesn't know how to help the unhappy family. Everyone is terrified and find out that a demon is attached by the doll. Idon't know the end of the story, but I don;t think that is a happy one...
The aim of this report is to highlight how the citizens care of the environment, in order to give suggestions to keep this area clean.
In the matter of that, information concerning what people do, or could do, are going to be shown.

Few people who live in the suburban areas have the following routine:
1 Check if your dog or anyone else's pet damages streets or gardens.
2 Divide wet rubbish from the products which cannot be recycled.
3 Denounce those who leaves rubbish in the wrong spaces.

Disadvantages: 
If the majority of citizens, including the ones who live in the city center, had followed these ideas, this city would have been surely cleaner. 
Unfortunately, deeper problems are linked to the difficulty that all the inhabitants respect those principles. 

Some thought that volunteers should involve careless people in many projects to keep their city attractive and marvelous.
It is proven that to be a part of a project always make people feel useful.
I would, therefore, recommend this idea.


 
 Nowadays, we can see that each time more public transport need to improve the quality of your services, the people daily need this kind of transport go to work, go to school and in general depend on so much of the public transport.
 The government can to improve the public transport making a great investment like changing the old vehicles for new and increase the number the bus, trains and build more bus station and trains station this kind the action will help a lot the quality of the public transport for population and will become the life of the people easier.
 Today many people prefer to travel by car than public transport because of the bad quality services, the bus, the trains are full, and many times are until dirty and late.  
  However, if this situation not change and if our government not take providence about this important subject will be the end of the transport public and will more convenient to use car.
I am writing this letter because we have to improve the gym of the school.

The gym has many problems that we are going to explain :

the first problem is that we don¡ät have enough apparatus for all the students 

the second problem is about that same apparatus are not working well because the school didn¡ät the entrance long time ago

For the first problem in my opinion, the school have to buy some others apparatus because there are not enough for all the students

For the second problem the solution for me is to hire someone to do the maintenance and say to all the students to take care of the machines of the school

I hope my proposal will be useful for you

I look forward to hearing from you soon

Sebasti¨¢n Ferrari
I work as freelancer journalist, prepare reports dealing with a whole situation in the city of Jerusalem, and publish my reports in many of the websites. I am also committed to preparing monthly reports for newspaper supplement ¡°The Voice of Women¡± which issued by the WATCH ¡°Women's Affairs Technical Committee, and I have the cooperation with the Environment and Development the magazine which issued by Center for development work "Main", and other websites and news and media organizations. 
The world is sadly lacking in an environmental mind in consequence, it caused the global warming which been the most important global problem it doesn't mind to more than three quarters of the world population. Currently, we have got more than six different types of banks in our streets but as far as I know it is not sufficient to meet the needs of the environment because nowadays, we do produce a lot of different materials, all of them overproduced, and we do only learn this education in our home in our childhood, accordingly I am one of the few worried teenagers in the world about it, so I really do help the environments as far as I can. First of all at home we recycle plastics, glasses, papers and cartons, oils, clothes, batteries, organics in an especial composting bank where we avoid burning or burying in excess those scraps with other materials and finally all the other things are sends to an especial tip where we avoid dropping it anywhere. Then when I have time and I see a senior citizen in the street introducing their scraps bag in a wrong bank I explain them who they have to recycle and who important it is for our environment to carefully recycle it
A couple of years ago, I hardly could see any bins in supermarkets and houses. Nowadays, I see everywhere bins and even a small kid of 3 years being taught to put unwanted materials in the bin. It is truly an amazing experience and how much progress my small village has had done in 2 years of time. Even though, there are not provided separate bins for different categories of dirt. So, We can easily see people throwing everything in the same bin. In spite of throwing dirt in a bin, we're also making some harm to environment unknowingly. As there are different kinds of materials, dirt. Some are renewable and some are not. 
In my opinion, in the next 50 years, humanity will increase and there won't be resources enough for everybody. There will be on another planets, for example the moon, many citadels inside an enormous dome. 
Then, I suppose that in every country will be used much more renewable energies instead nuclear energies for reassure a secure future for the next generations, and maybe everybody will use electric car for decrease the atmospheric pollution.
The people's life will change even by policy and the economy. I hope that in the future there will not be any war by the economic crisis. 
I think that public transport has a future, indeed travel in a car is much more comfortable, because you don't have to walk to take a bus or the underground.
But there's a thing, no one have enough money to buy a car or maybe two; that's why there's a lot of people who prefer the public transport.
Perhaps in a future public transport it can be more comfortable for the rest of the people who doesn't have a car.
I think that there isn¡ät for public transport because nowadays, the people usually use your private car. This is some advantages such us it is more comfortable and fast.
When you travel by bus, you must have a timetable, and it is less comfortable than travelling by car.However, when you go by car you can take your car whenever you want. Sometimes private transports are cheaper if your go is other people. For example, when you go by car you can go with other people, so you pay less money for gas oil.
On the other hand, private transport are damaging for planet because we must take care of the planet. We can help to prevent the contamination of the environment, if we take travel public transport which don¡ät pollute.
At the moment, there are more one cars to person, it is a problem for me because people don¡ät take cure environment. They prefer to be comfortable.
In conclusion, using public transport produce less damage to the environment and most people prefer.
I want to describe a famous actor from my country, he is Sergey Bezrukov. He participates in many interesting movies and operas. Some of them I saw, when was a young girl. He has very important skills for the actor, these are charisma and charm. What is more, he is a good husband and father for his children.

I think he deserved to be famous, because he is a very talented person. Now he has opened his owned company. I am planning to visit his company.

One of his interesting film about musician, which was popular for 1980-2000 years. His name is "Viscosity".
Life is unpredictable and unforeseen. The immense possibilities of life give us opportunity to explore life, but sometimes it leads to threat and dangers to our life. We surely pray for the best life of our dear and near ones. But insurance is also necessity and inevitable for peace of mind. It gives us surety to live life securely. It just not only to save our life but also secure assets like houses cars etc. 
The insurance for non-accidental death is known as general insurance and for life is known as life insurance.
But we still sold it, not bought it. Number of countries give attention and provide secure life to their citizens .but our country still under insurance.
Government should play key role by providing trustworthy organization surveyors loss assessors etc. To aware people by run awareness campaign. To provide insurance at nominal prices. And claim policies should be easy. Give surety so that people can accept and trust the insurance companies.
FDI can play an important role in it. It gives competition to national companies. By virtue of which they work properly mannerly and give better option to policyholders. People can always buy nominal premium, we should be aware them about the types of insurance as well as benefits of the insurance.
Soccer is one of the most games in the world and I like it very much. I love soccer because when I was a child my brothers were taking with them to the club and I enjoy it when I watch them. In fact, I really enjoy it when I play soccer for many reasons. First, soccer is very famous game in the world and a lot of people like to play soccer and I try to play like them. For example, I can watch many matches a day and I enjoy it when I watch famous players such Cristiano Ronaldo with Real Madrid and Messy with Barcelona. Second, soccer is a very interesting game because when I play soccer I feel very happy. Moreover, soccer help human body to be very healthy because when someone plays soccer his organisms become strong. Finally, I like playing soccer because most of my friends like me play soccer too much everyday that makes me love it too much. I would like to say for anyone wants playing soccer to be very careful when he plays it because it may cause a lot of injures, but in the same time it is very nice game.
Hello John!
I read your e-mail, so let's talk about books! I usually read a book on my free time, because I prefer story than short articles. Recently I read four great books about Shoah, they were very interesting, my favorite was: "The Book Thief", I read it for school, but I have already sawed the film of this book. It's a very moving book, but it isn't difficult, I think that's for teenagers, but is also good for adults. I love the thing, that in this book, there are a lot of German words, so I also could improve my German (I go to the languages high school).
And what about your book? What are you reading?
I hope you'll answer me soon.
Bye Serena
Travelling or moving from a place to another by car is much more convenient for a man than public transport. By car, you can go whenever you want on time with no need to wait for hours at the stations for bus or subway. It is faster and cleaner and much more comfortable. For example, if you are in a hurry and want to catch the place you are heading to, you can drive as fast as possible. You can have some other choices that you can stop to buy something: water, juice or snack if you get hungry your way or thirsty. You even can take a rest for a while pleasingly to sleep or to have a nap. Furthermore, you wouldn't suffer any more from the trouble or annoying stuff on bus most of the time like: no room for you to sit, bad smell people can make, or get bothering or bushing. It's convenient already. 

But, on the other hand, because of recently traffic has been terrifically unbearable; cars are so many; very noisy, unclear air produced has become the public transport better to save earth. 
In all over the world, people always need advices to keep looking after their environments. First, the municipal should do workshops in schools and universities providing students by tips that should help us to make our environment clean. Second, they should make awareness campaigns about environment ;for example, telling people to put their rubbish in waste paper basket which helping workers to recycling it easily. Finally, to stay healthy, we need a healthy environment.
I used to find a lungful sensei to teach me. But at the region where I live I had not found. Sunday, started Krav Maga class in a gym close to my house. I did not think two times. I went there and sang. Furthermore, I discovered a new world. It is a good self defense... it is object, simple and fast. Krav Maga teaches how to control ourselves in hard situations. Sometimes we are with people that we love. When someone wants to hurt our relatives or friends, we must do something. There are a lot of bad people in the street. If it was not true, the life would be so better.
The most exciting day of my life was when my sister and I discovered that we would spend one week on a cruise with our friends! That was a very beautiful Holiday! We spent a lot of time together every day; we visited some fantastic cities in Greece like Santorini, Athens and many others. In Italy, we also visited Bar and Venice too.
Every day we spent time on the beach and across the sea. Every evening we went to the restaurant on the cruise. Meals were very good and also in the morning I ate English breakfast or eggs and bread because I wanted to change my routine while I was on the cruise.
I think it's the most exciting holiday I've ever spent and my favorite too.
I and my classmates with our teachers and other classes went to the cinema to see the film "Fantastic Boccaccio". It was an interesting experience to go to the cinema to my class and see in a film what I have studied during the Italian lesson and understand better the stories of Boccaccio, one of the most important Italian writer.
Seeing the film, we have had the possibility to watch the characteristics of the main characters of Boccaccio and the different places where the stories took place.
In my opinion, the film was made in a very good way: the registers of the film (they are two) tell us five novels with only one main protagonist: the love in every situation. The registers of the film said that they want to create a film without time, and they were able to create this.
The scenes of film, the costumes and the music are very beautiful, and I suggest this film to all of my friends.

 According to the past century, we have seen lots of change in the world. It's obvious that nowadays is really different from 50 years ago, so we can predict that the people's lives will change dramatically in the next 50 years. When it comes to change, we can think of what way of our lives is still inconvenient that it can probably change. Most of the labors will probably have been represented by machinery, the people who are lack of academic might be very hard to get a job, the knowledge might be demand if the people live in the future. 
        There are some issues that make worried, the environment is getting worse, we have to come up with the methods to solve this and save our Earth. The relationship among the countries is also significant, as we can see discord is among the countries, hoping that it will not draw the war. 
Television entertains as well as it will educate the people. These days are educating themselves by watching the television. Televison not only provide entertainment, it will give lots of information about the happenings around the globe. Channels like National Geographic and animal planet will tell us the animal behavior and the origination of species. Few programs some intellectual programs will increase the creativity of the people
When Michael wakes up that morning he feels, a strange smell in the air, he does not know what is the origin of that strange smell but, in his noose, he receives a kind of sign something bad happened. Very quickly he went of and try to put of his head of that sensation, but... the smell, the feelings, the sign...but "what? What is that?" the think.
He star watch the kids there running, playing, laughing a lot, the same couple of yesterday talking about love, the sadness in the city. 
With a great effort sate down on the grass, he feels tired, and has a little sensation of pain in his boson, site there with many sounds on air, he star recall...his face is changing is dark, he has now a clear image of all, when opened the door of the house his girlfriend is there dying on the floor, Michael remembers all, the fight, the lays, the screams, the knife...the blood; but Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake. 
The diabetes is the increasing of the glucose in the blood, They have two types, first the Diabetes Type 1 that is present in children's, patient needs insulin every day, also this diabetes is caused by the destruction of the insulin realized by the person¡äs immune sister.  The Diabetes Type 2 is present in adults people, the insulin is generated but this not work in the body, so the amounts' glucose is storage in the body.  This diabetes is caused by the bad alimentation of the people or because the people have a bad life.  So it is necessary to eat vegetable and fruit and also to do exercises. 
My view is that public transport is good because it has prevented pollution, which is good for the public. May people can think travelling by car is more comfortable for them. However, they must understand travelling by car is not any kind of exercise. If planned to travel by public transport, people will walk to bus station and get down from the bus and walk for necessary thing. So my opinion is good for both parties 
Hi,
It¡¯s Roosevelt, hope you know me.

Hope this message finds you in good health ?

On 25th January 2013, Linda came in to my life.  And I want to give a surprise to Linda by sending her a short movie.  
If you guys could share a quality, memory or any eventful time that you shared with her through video message would a great favor to me.

Please record your message and send it to my email id f9u54t4g245@gmail.com before 24th eve. I know it¡¯s too late but hope you guys will support me.

Please don¡¯t tell Linda about it.

Thanking you
Roosevelt 

Hello Maxi!!
I was waiting for your email. How are you? What are you doing? Do you do any sport?
If this week, I went to the country Is very funny because we went to the cinema, and we eat in a lot of different restaurants.
Bye, I have to go.
See you soon
Hi readers of international sports monthly magazine.
I wrote to sponsoring my favorite sport, the most beautiful sport in the World,
basketball.
Basketball is a complete sport, aerobic and anaerobic.
It's a team sport, the team it's made of 5 people, and you need a ball and a hoop.
I enjoy this sport because I love team sports and games with a ball.
Some people say that basket it's only for tall guys
but it isn't true, in the A league in Italy we have different players not very tall
like 1 meter and 60, so if you love this game you can play it no matter what
find only a ball and a hoop and play it.
If you want to start this sport, find a friend that can teach you the basic movements and how to pass and shot
than the practice makes the rest.
If you train, and you have willpower, nothing can stop you.
Nowadays, basketball is spreading around the World. I hope that the amount of players will increase and increase every day more.
So let's play basketball.

Ryan Gordon loves all sports,, but he works hard at school too. At the moment he is doing three A-levels at Camden college.
He is going to go to university next year.
At the weekend he usually plays football or basketball and this year he is learning how to rock climb. He goes twice a week to the local climbing center.
School is finishing in two weeks and next summer he wants climbing in Scotland.
I have the best friend when I was a student at high school. We studied hard together to prepare the university exam, shared about our problems and almost things has relative with us. It's a great time for me. He made me happy and safe. He seemed as my boyfriend. The first year of the university, I showed my love to him. Unfortunately, he refused me. I had an affair, love. Day by day, I tried to forget my love in his quiet. I didn't call, send message and met him. Although I did well for a long time, one day, he contacted again with me, so I didn't ignore him. He said that he wanted to be the best friend as before. But no, what I can do it? I still love him, even my love become bigger. What I should do? Should I show my love again ?
When I was a child, I wore usually blue, grey and red colors. My bedroom is blue and orange, the colors of my toys when I was a child are different. I always chose my clothes because only me know my favorite clothes and when I was child my toys. Now I wear different colors for example black, blue,gray and other. Maybe they will change
Pompey - the destroyed city

I'm sure you'll agree, Pompey is the most important archeological site in the world. It was destroyed by a volcanic eruption in 75 BC. Vesuvius - this is the volcano's name! - covered it with a lot of cinders so that walls, houses, food, clothes, corps of citizens has been preserved as well they were. 
You can walk through the same streets and enter the same shops the Romans entered some centuries ago! It isn't incredible? Besides, is possible to book special tours in which there are guides dressed like Pompey's citizens. I love the overnight tour, in which only fires light the ruins. There is a unique atmosphere! 
In my opinion, anyone couldn't come to Italy without visiting Pompey. If you come, I promise you'll never forget it!

I don't think there is no future for public transport. Especially in urban, for example, Taipei city in Taiwan. People who live there almost know the convenient public transport called MRT, it's fast, cheaper and doesn't have to find the parking lot.
Besides, it's harmful and makes earth environment worse for emission so much carbon dioxide. That will cause the global warming. So, it is better to use public transport.

But, if you live in the country, car may be essential, because it's will spend so much money to buy the tickets if their family have many people.

So, I think the government should have to draw a proposal to solve the problems between the use for urban and country. And think deeply the problem about protecting the environment.
I love my small family. My family members are very helpful and supportive. My parents are very support. My parents are my best friends and guides. If any problems faced, I'm went to my parents and say the problem, there are solved the problem. My family is my world. My parents are the good guides. There are my role model.sometimes we were gone to the tour programs, it's very happy moments. My mammy told the story in the night. Mom makes the special foods in festivals. My family is a nuclear family. My family is great. 
Steve Ramsay work in the espionage agency S.H.I.E.L.D and live in Washington, D.C. after the Battle of New York. Someday, an S.H.I.E.L.D.¡¯s agent was attacked by the ghost. After that, Steve become an America captain to protect the world again. But he doesn¡¯t know he is involved in a conspiracy. He meets a strong opponent who is winter soldier when he wants to find out the wire puller.

Walking every day is what I enjoy.
Besides to be an excellent exercise, it is also the more comfortable, because it allows me to concentrate, to be with myself, talking and praying to God in each step in the morning.
I woke up 5H00 o'clock in the morning, 
I consider this is the best time to do sport, taking into account that the pollution is down at that time. 
There is not so much traffic, and my senses and lounges perceive and respire all the smell that flowers, land, the First, I walk slowly, and then I begin to walk as soon as possible to improve my fitness and I end walking 5 turns in the park.
What I really enjoy it is to lie in the grass.  It is At this moment when I get to talk to God.
I feel that he is near to me, that he listens to me every word that I pray.
Doing so, I begin my routine day, come back home, begin to do my breakfast, followed by the lunch, because I have to get to work at 9H00 o'clock.
It is an activity that goes according to the capacity of each one, that doing it each morning improvement our health and move away all the bad of our body.

The graph below gives information about seasonal sales for ice-cream of different places in ice cream van and indoor swimming pool in Jan to Dec. Overall, average of 5000 dollars of year about ice cream van. In addition£¬indoor swimming pool sales have a slightly declining from 2012 to 2014.
First, the graph showed an upward trend to ice cream Anand in 2014£¬it has the largest percentage of sales nearly 5500 dollars in Jul-Sep. No matter what year, its lowest level always in Jan-Mar. May be because this paragraph of time the weather was cold, the purchaser greatly reduced. We can be seen from the diagram, the highest peak in the has increased year by year, as the low as.
Seconder indoor swimming pool it generally appear wavy, falling£¬from 2500 dollars in 2012 to 2000 dollars in 2014. We can infer, it will not rise sharply, and it is impossible to fall sharply.
Most people like to have their own car, because they think it is more comfortable and flex. You can go out from your house and take your car park and leave to your job and park very close. But I think that the future is the public transport, we need to preserve nature, this is an imperative for our world, then the solution have to take the point that the governments do more invest in public transport, so the people don¡ät need to get a car for being able to have a job and don¡ät need it for normal development of their lives. 
As well, we have to promote that the people get jobs close their accommodation or get the accommodation close to the jobs, because we have too much pollution, and we could reward the companies that hire staff close to the place of job, maybe in a circle of 4 kilometers, as well we could reward the people that turn their accommodation for live near to the job or for going there by a bicycle. Maybe this sound a bit crazy, but whatever solution will be good, we only must make our minds up for able to look across.
What is my favorite sport? Well, I've played martial arts. I've been doing that for around twenty years. Some martial arts are not really sports. They're more for self-defense but for what I do, and my way to stay healthy, is martial arts and running. As far as watching, that's a good question. I would suppose I would have to say, in Japan, Sumo is my favorite sport for watching. I've never tried it myself. Furthermore, I would have to probably be three times as big as I am to even begin to qualify for something like that, but, yeah, I enjoy watching it a lot.
I have to start saying that I never imagine swimming like my favorite sport, because until my back¡äs injury, I practiced other sports, I most like extreme sports like downhill, skateboarding martial arts like Aikido, jiujitsu or ninjutsu, but for my injury I have to start swimming, and now I love it. 
The think because I enjoy these sport is I feel free when I am in the water, it is so relaxing and I read it is the most completely sport because you work the whole body. 
If you want to start swimming I think you should look for a swimming teacher because if can¡ät swim, you must need it, and if you can swim but not well, if you are not on practice and know your swim style is not the best I recommend you a professional assistance. More time that you don¡ät have that assistance is going to be more difficult to improve your style and enjoy swimming more because if you really know how to swim are going to have more resistance in the water.

 Hi! My name is Katia, and I am a student of electronic engineering. I am on third year at the university, I don't know what will be the master that I go to make, but I want a master relationed with programming. I have many difficulties in programming, but I think that if I work hard I can to win my difficulties.
 Now I am on Christmas holidays. I have to study so much. On last days, I and my group made some experiences for our project. We used some resistors and a source of two hundred and thirty volts to control the temperature of water. Initially, we had some problems because the resistors did not increase the temperature enough to warm the water. The next week we go to prepare some material for to resolve these problems. But I also have other tasks. I want to make a review about my book about Nigeria and read another book about robots and their mechanism. I go to try to read this books for to evaluate my English, because in the future I intend to make the first certificate. This is very important for me because when I went for a company I will need a certificate!!! 
 
Hi Jo! 
How are you? I have received your letter At this moment.
I think that you can to come to my country when you want because I will help you.
In the first place, I think that you must look to internet. You would see different city of country, and you can choose the best. In my opinion, you must go to Madrid or Barcelona because its are more attractive. Barcelona is big and there are a lot of industries so there are a lot of jobs. Also, Madrid is a nice city, you can to find all things that you need. In Madrid there are some jobs too, and you will be near me.
Spanish¡äs food is fantastic, although there are a lot of restaurants to eat you and I think that the food is more expensive than your country. If you don¡ät like Spanish¡äs food, you can go restaurant the other country, but I know you love it.
On the other hand, people are friendly as you know, because you know some Spanish person.
You must come because I think that my country would you love it and I always help you.
I hope to come you here.
Take care
Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately.
He picked up the keys and came out fast to the home.
By the time he was going down the stairs from the fourth floor, his neighbor Mary stopped him.
Peter was very worried. He needed to arrive at the Train Station on time.
Despite the urgency of taking the train on time. He was kind and spoke with Mary.
The widow woman who was very nice gave a present for Peter. 
The young Polish very grateful replied to the woman: "Thank you, it hasn't to make any present"
Mary smiled to Peter and said:"You are welcome, now, you have to enjoy your family. Have a good journey".
It was a pity for Peter to leave Bath, but he had to come back to its country. 
Dear Jo
 I'm so glad you come to my country. I'll give you some suggestions, hoping that you can have a wonderful summer vacation!
 If you want a short-term job, I think a restaurant is the best one for you. It not only offers high salary but also the employee there is kind. You must, can gain a great experience. 
 When it comes to travelling, you can never miss night markets. At there, you can have a taste of cuisine from all around the world, which will make you freshen up. Moreover, once you have a bite of sausage, you must fall in love with it.
 If you still have any questions, just call me. I will help you as much I can. Hope you can have a good time.  
                            Best wishes,
                                Paulina
Peter looked at his watch and knew that he has to do something immediately.
He had forgotten to go to his English classes. It was half past seven and her class begun fifteen minutes ago. Last week, her mother told her that he had to go to his classes if he wanted to hang out with his friends.
He already knew that he was late,, but he could not go now, so he decided to cheat her mother.
He did homework from his books, so his mother might believe it.
But he did not realize something, His little brother was watching him through the window.
When her mother came back from work, her little son told her what his brother had done.
She was very angry, and could not believe that her son did that. After that, Peter did not hang out for three months, so he can learn the lesson, You must not lie or cheat to your mother.

I think that the public transport always going to be so important in our life because not all the people have the possibility to buy a car because the public transport is more expensive than a car, so for that reason the public transport in the future could be existed, because public transport is a necessity in all the world not only for the money but too for the facility to take a bus or any other public transport
Yesterday I went to the Ulster Museum in the Botanic Gardens at 2pm. I went to nature section, which is interesting as it is about natural aspects on earth like elements, rocks and periods of life related to organisms. The section was big, and it had a lot of information scientifically, some section had complete information part while others had not. Beginning in one of the complete parts that I preferred and liked, I'm going to write about the Ice age. It was a period of time in earth's history when temperatures fell globally, causing ice sheets and glaciers to form far from the north and South Pole.
?What did you learn about debates?

Mel, who was a teacher for young people. Teach about a debate. How to be a good debater. 
He uses a rule for debates: preposition+ result = positive or negative (Why)
Every debate has a hot spot. A hot spot is a place where the debaters can explain the idea. Hot spot helps to get more security. Always in front of your public.
The result depend on: security, volume in the voice, body posture and public.
The main idea is keep the body, take the mind.
The great debaters, have to believe in your idea. Doesn't matter the idea, only the arguments. I don't know isn't answer. 
An Important deal, is never quit. Always fight if you want. Debates is a combat

Peter has just got out by school, and he realized that he's overdue for his weekly guitar lesson. But before the lesson, he has to lunch with his family and leading the dog from the veterinary for his annual vaccine. Peter gets a fast lunch in ten minutes, other two minutes for finding the bike and putting the dog on the basket; at the office of the veterinary three people wait, so Peter is forced to wait. After an hour, the dog is vaccine and taken to home, but her mother needs a milk bottle. Unfortunately Anne, her sister, has just taken the bike, so he's forced to walk until the nearest supermarket. Peter's mother needs a special kind of milk without lactose, and the market behind home doesn't have it. So Peter had to make a choice: going at the lesson or waiting his father for getting to take the milk with the car? After an exhausting afternoon, Peter has a bit of luck, in fact his father Jack has just come back from the work, so he could get to take the milk and giving him a passage. With a little delay, but Peter did it!
Firstly, I want to introduced my self. 
I am a young woman with a melancholy's character. I am an introvert too. I have many problems with my speaking skill. If stay of the public and want to do presentation, I always get nervous. I don't know why, it's always occur to me. Sometimes, I feel so stupid because I really can't speak in front of the public. 

Second.
I love write but I not confidence with my grammar. I do many mistake in every story I already right down. The wrong tense I used. I call this mistake with "Du".
Why "Du?" . Yeah. Because I love used this word. 

I have no idea after this sentence. 
An excessive amount of cars on the road is not an option as this could cause problems in most metropolitan areas. There would be a tremendous amount of pollution and traffic jams. As the population grows, you will an increasing problem.

Therefore, public transportation is the future and more and more people will be using the metro, public buses etc.

Cars are not good. They have pollution. But they go fast.  

Cars are red. Choo, choo paid
Sport is the activity that help the people to have an optimal physical.
I think that sport is important for discipline in life.
My favorite sport is football, it is a complete sport, there are aggression, mentality and fun.
My favorite football club is Naomi, it is the heart club, for this team I feel indescribable emotions... when I see my team, I smile in moments of joy, I cry in moments of sadness and suffering and rejoice when they score and win the game.
I advise to all people that want to start sport if they do begin, because this sport helps to grow and mature.
Work in your own company is very challenging because you deal with a lot of areas, manage all departments and learn about business, management, economics, sales, engineering, technical support and other skills. You are responsible for your workers and the customer satisfaction, However is very satisfying to see how your own company is grown up, and your customers return again because they loved your job.
That work looks depressing, demanding and stressful but is very rewarding and if you like the challenges you never will bore
Dear Friend
           hope you are fine, kindly be known that I miss you so much, and I hope to see you soon.
 I'm very happy to know that you want to come to Egypt and work in it. Here are some tips about the Egyptian people 
they are so kind, friendly, stressed but have a lot of problems now days the level of poverty, standard of level, the fixed cost is increasing dramatically, and the purchasing power is decreasing. The salary or the income in Egypt does not match with this increase or this inflation. So if you want to work in Egypt you must have complete information about the job (location, salary, incentives, Allowances, work environment, position titles, company type, policy , mission,vision)

 With best Wishes
                                                                                               Same Sabbath
Hi mum and dad

Today I had a trip to a museum and an art gallery with my school. The museum and the art gallery located in the capital city. The museum is huge and beautiful. I really like antiques, even though it is not much to look at. The art gallery is nice too. They have some paintings of Leonardo da Vinci which is really impress me. My favorite part is listened to a guide introduce to panting art. I can't wait to back home and tell you more about the trip. 

Love from your son :).
Thanh.
In my city, we have not a regular care for the environment. 
There have been many projects to improve the caring of the environment.
But there is a big problem: the people's culture.
In my country you can do a lot of efforts to take care of the environment, but the bad culture in our people is a great problem. 
That is because we don't demonstrate interest in the problems of others.
We think that our authorities are responsible for these themes. 
Then, we don't take positive actions, individually. 
We just wait until others clean the streets.
The people put their rubbish in bags and threw it away near their houses.
They don't spend money in a good container. 
Then, the dogs can break the bags and eat the rubbish.
In this way, the streets are always dirty.
In my case, I prefer to have a clean Street.
It doesn't matter if I lose time putting the bags with rubbish in a good container. 
If everyone's demonstrate a better culture, it is possible to improve our environment.

Nowadays, we grow up with the possibility of choosing a lot of sports. This fact allows young people do exercise and enjoy at the same time. Do team sports also help to meet other people and make new friends.

The favorite sport of many people is football, instead of my favorite is basketball. I started to play it when I was twelve years old, and currently I still love this sport. My main reason to love it is how you feel when play a match and finally your team win. Also, I have known great friends who play basketball.

Every sport focus on some parts of the body, however basketball is the most complete sport. It is true that basketball require a lot of physical activity, but a good mental attitude is very important. You can't be disappointed because you don't get any point or have a bad day, due to the other players can sympathize with you. If it happens, you will continue doing the best as you can. To reach this, I recommend do exercise three times a week and follow a healthy diet.

Adolescent has always been the hardest part throughout anybody's whole life.
Turning out in a fleeting glimpse into an adult, perceiving the other side of life, how tough and complicated it is, trying to deal with its different circumstances.

At this point you merely have a brief look at your whole life, many questions spinning in your head, accusing yourself of being a lost cause, wishing if you could turn the clock back,but it's all no good.

Then you find yourself standing ahead of clouds of reality, which sucks.
Life is stages, this stage of your life is timeless, no way out.

At some point you wish if it was all illusion, you need a time machine makes it possible to go back in time when you could see the purity of life.
However.here you are completely different made of life lessons, preferring to make a stiff upper lip.cowering in your own reality.
Yes, television entertains, but it can also educate. Television can improve knowledge on current affairs. Education doesn¡¯t lie on current affairs or related concepts. Television helps us find the fields that interest us, like music, sports, movies or nature. These days, television allows us to see happenings all around the world. However, there are quite a lot of disadvantages of television. Especially, the fake news spreads faster without much effort. It depends on the individual, how to make use of the opportunity. 
The New Music


Blues, Rock n Roll, folk music were the basis for the new music. 1966 - 1967 the huge change takes place. The 3 musics were even known in 1963. Every music express other feelings. There were some people who started playing Rock songs. And after this everybody started to change their type of music. Electronic was born. It made everything possible. Then the music hanged to multimedia. And so changed the old music to the new music.









The circuit is characterized by long straights and chicanes, which makes it possible to achieve high-speeds. Drivers drive the cars with full throttle for over 75% of the lap, longer than the other circuits. In my opinion, riding at high-speed on the long straight can because overheating the car's engines and the can blow up. The rugged curbs can cause the suspension to crack. The falling leaves can be block driver¡¯s view and block up the radiators. I think cutting trees which around the circuit and undercutting curbs can be reduced danger and technical problem on the track, and we have to reduce long straights.
Global power and politics are now surprisingly centered to those, which have an apex maturity of science. Addiction to authoritative nature over other makes a huge production of war weapons convert the blessing nature of science into critics.  Despite all the assistance of science in daily life, it has not without criticism in different views. Science replaces human labor into instrument, but what about happiness? There is no definition of happiness in scientism, or how could it get through the scientific user manual. Very often, it has criticized to change indigenous cultures into so-called luxurious development, contradictory to religious faith. Science is concerned only with the information about the world whatever it is, and sometimes in unethical conclusion without considering the morality.  It occupies so pivotal a role in modern society and commands so much public money, should find itself subject to criticism from a variety of source. But living 21st century, It's difficult to blame science where we are benefited through its technological applications on every day our life to an ever-great extent.
My country is pretty clean compared to the cities and countries that I know,, although there are a few pieces of paper or plastic on the streets, but residents have a great respect for nature. In fact, they keep the woods clean, and the owners sent the loggers to remove dead trees now or those that could lead to hazards, but every time you remove a tree, it is immediately put a young plant so that the environment does not undergo changes that will lead out balance the system. For waste management across the country, even in the countryside, they were placed the bins for recycling paper, plastic, glass and waste. Three times a week, garbage trucks pass to empty them, and once a week a garbage collector passes to clean up the streets.
Travelling by using any transport has become in one of our needs, in the past people used to take hours waiting for the public transport, now, we can afford any of those modern car at the agency.

The future of the public transport is fading away, you might ask why. The main problem is the bad service, for example, the drivers are not careful enough to drive, that might be unsafe for the users. Another disadvantage is the unclean chairs in the transport.

Those are the main reasons that could make the public transport disappear. I consider the best option to buy a car, so we can feel safe.
Firstly, it is a good idea for young children to do physical activity that is the first step to take exercise, then to compete sports will make competition to make an extra effort.
Also, just for young children that are in process of growth and development, physical exercise is essential to do it, because they can have a healthier life. Young children try to effort, and wants to win at this age, and if they train results were better and encourages keeping training. In psychic way, if you are adapted forms relations and create new friends.
In the future, adults that was able to obtain more achievements and make it more responsible, and you can have a good social life, if you compete doing sports.
In addition, stress is a clear disadvantage to compete because competitions are trying to win and this can frustrate. But, some people do not think this like this and take it more simply
Finally, I think that to compete in sports has some benefits and disadvantages, but when is controlled there are some benefits that help you to whole your life.
Dear sir / Madam,

For upcoming enhancement, I would like to inform you that there was no longer the public transportation services since travel by car more convenient. Therefore, travel by car is ready by now.

Best regards,
Penn
Shops in the town

Introduction
The aim of this report is to outline what are shopping facilities in our town and write some tips for tourists with different preferences.

Shopping facilities
Although our town is quite small, there are many variations of shops such as clothes shop, sport shops, toy shops or bookshops. Even though the shops is not large, there are remarkable goods, for example, nice running shoes or valuable books.

Possibility of the shops
All in all, the shops have a variety of goods, which can attract many tourists. If you have a small kid, you will visit toy shops, which offer many cars and helicopters. On the other hand, you can visit bookshops whether you are pensioner, and you have a lot of free time.

Conclusion
To sum up, I suppose our town offers many interesting shops. Moreover, the goods is quite cheap.
Halloween is a traditional holiday in the USA, but the original history came from Celtic people. The immigrants came with this religious culture and along the time has become part of American culture. Today this holiday is celebrated around the word, and you can have fun with party or costume yourself. 
The picture below illustrates how to make banknotes. First is to design the note, including background color, artwork and security issues. Second is to prepare mental plates as well as qualified machinists. Then is printing with special ink. When the one side is printed, raising the images slightly to make the opposite to be colored. Last is the key step, inspection. It is of importance to inspect the printed sheets. If the sheet is good or partial damaged, it can be packed and delivered by vassals after cutter in to separate notes. Otherwise, the sheets and notes would be abandoned and destroyed in the fire.

The issue of whether there is no future for public transport is a topic that has cased an ongoing argument. In my topic, i intend to discuss to contravening view point in more depth. 

Firstly, some people believe that public transport is a significant part in our live and its more difficult to rely on our cars only.  

Hi my name is Chai, I'm from Thailand, I try to write an article to improve my writing skill and hope this program can help me. 
My favorite way to travel is the plane because I like to be fast and in my life, I hate a wait in my opinion the plane is the best for me for example when you want to go somewhere you need to reach there so quick, you don't need to take time and The plane is the best travelling in the world that the best safer than other way , you can see on the pollution of people who got an accident, how often an accident happen by the plane so anyway if it's happen, i can't imagine it, Eventually I wish everyone who like to travel is safe and sound and safe journey.  
My studies in technologies de Monterrey are demanding and challenging because it has a very high educative score all worldwide, but also has to many good things, for example we have a lot of interchanges all around the world, when you have the opportunity to do an interchange you have to deal with the language and the culture with the other country, that means you have to be responsible for studying the basics things of that country, but all of this is worthwhile because when you are there you have so much fun.
I think that a complete sport is to swim for most of the people. It's good for health and wellness.
I really enjoy because give me a lot of relax, and it helps me to be tonic and satisfied myself.
Usually I go three times a week and during the weekend. I advise people to start this sport, because is completely and make you mind with the body feel very good. When I was fourteen years old, I win the championship because in that period I swam as agonistic eyelet.
It had been a really satisfaction and I had been happy. Nowadays, I'm really grateful to my parents because they have spent money for me and I have to thank them. I think this sport is the most completely compared to the other sports. Your muscles begin more efficient and tonic, and you have a lot of benefits for the body.

To: International organization 
From: Dimitri Barbers
Subject: Our green town

Introduction

The aim of the report is to write how are town take care of the environment. I do a research and this are findings. 

Rubbish

We have a lot of bins around the area, so now we can throw our litters whenever we are. Also, we have recycle bins for paper and glass.

Cleaners 

Every Saturday our local cleaning team clean the park and now everyone can enjoy it! 

Conclusion 

We do everything to make our town more green, our citizens always have new ideas that make the difference of our daily life.  
It is common that more and more people get overweight, caused by too much fast food and unhealthy lifestyle. 
Now some scientists have suggested to having warnings on some types of food and drink. But is this idea a way to reduce the bad habit of consume noxious foodstuff?
On the one hand, I can't imagine that a little scene on the food people entrap to stop their shopping and read the warnings. Life is fast moving and time is money. Everything has to happen fast. 


First, we need to make people aware of the current environmental situation in order to do activities that help the environment.
To begin with, we have to try to use as little as possible the car or the bus and try to get to any place walking or by bicycle. This action would decrease the gas emitted to the environment.
In addition, the water issue is another big problem. Nowadays, people are wasting water instead of saving it. One basic solution for this point is tried to not take a shower for so much time but taking it with a bucket and a few minutes. Another solution is to not waste water while we are washing dishes. We should use another bucket for this task.
Talking about rubbish, it is very important to separate it in the following types: metal, plastic, organic, glass and cardboard in order to make the collection task easy for the dustman. However, we also have to try to not create more rubbish, recycling most of them. For example, the organic rubbish can be used as fertilizer, the metal scrap can be taken to the melting factory as well as the glass.
Therefore, the environment is not going to recover if we do not decide to take our part in this global problem.


Paxton had arrived at Seaborg to in the Hotel. There be Long and the writer... One night Paxton was speaking them about the crown that had spoken with an old man (Bob Carter) and said to him to about the family Ages who protected the crown.?
But one of them had dead a little while ago, and he was who protected the crown.  Paxton goes to the house de Williams Ages y find the crown in the hill. But Long and The Writer helped to again the crown bury because the shadow of him was following. A day in the morning Paxton waited to Long y the writer, but he listened that called him suddenly he goes for the beach and is killed for the shadow

Public transport is and always will be very important for society. As we¡äve seen these days that the amount of cars is increasing so much every year. As a consequence of an increasing in number of private cars. Governments around the world have talking a lot about the measures should be taken to improve public transport quality. No doubts, travelling by car is pretty much better than go by public bus. 
Although Louis felt nervous, she realized this was the opportunity of a lifetime. I was manager at a retail store. Everyday work stressed me and by the end of my shift I get so tired. I decided to go back to school. The program I start at school was very tough for me, because of my slow English writing. I do not have very good English writing skill. My grammar and spellings are week. I am struggling in school. I am trying my best, hope I will pass my course and get a good job.  
Hi Jo! 

I'm really sorry, you can't come over because my father is at the hospital for 14 days. But in 3 weeks I'm free. When do you want to come? Write to me soon, please.
Mira
The future transport is the public, because the traffic it will be less. When the people travel by car is for work, holidays or for other motive.
We should use the less car, it is very pollutant.
I will start with old transport, if we didn't make any maintenance this type will be damaged and lose it.
In the future, every person will use his car and no need for public transport. This type of transport have a path and just take you for specific places, and you can't use it to go to small streets.
But in some country, You can use underground (metro), it is very advancer than old types like Bus or Taxi, The underground is faster and clean and arranged.
About pollution, it is a big issue in public transport, with time if you try to fix the machine of public transport that will be cost, because with time the live age of this machine will finish. 
Michael is a man of 22 years, he has studied the career of electricity engineer, and now he wants to put into practice his knowledge. He went to buy a newspaper to search for a job, he was looking all the advertisements, but he never found the one he needed. Michael though that it was time to do something. He could not be at home all day doing such nothing,, so he started to look for another job that would be suitable for him. When he was a kid he wanted to work in a video games shop so for his good luck it was available a job at PlayStation store. Of course, he does not think twice and go to print his curriculum because the interview was that day, then he took a shower and dress for the occasion. He prepared something to eat fast, brushed his teeth, he just took his mobile, keys and money, but he hadn't noticed that he was forgetting of his curriculum. However, Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
My favorite sport is soccer. It is an interesting activity! There is FIFA World Cup too! There are some soccer stars like Messi, Neymar,Ronaldo...... Soccer can make you healthier. There are soccer lessons. I have joined the lesson. First, the teacher will train us soccer technique. Next, we will have a soccer competition. But we will break our legs. We need to be careful. Soccer is an interesting sport,, but we need to be careful.
My father is 73 years old, his name is Bra him. He is tall and smart, he looks like a movie star. My father has many hobbies, he plays football, reads newspaper and listens to radio.
In my opinion, family is more important than friends, but probably I spent more time with my friends than family. I know if I need something, my family is always there. The difficult is that you rarely know if your best friend is a true friend.  Unfortunately, my best friend deceived me, I don¡ät know how she managed, but she hurts me. 
 
My cousins are very reliable, like my grandmother and my parents. The family has a link in blood therefore you have a natural empathy. For all rules have exceptions. I don¡ät trust in some members of my family, and I have friends like brothers. 

You need to discovered who is your best friends. Lifelong, you will learn who is who. For me, my best friends are in my family, except one. She
has grown up with me, and now she is my sister too. 
My city is Ja¨¦n, it's in the east of Andalusia and is an important cross way between the south and center OS Spain. So an important historical place is the St. Katherine's castle. This is an old castle of 10th century and the style is Arabian. It's over a high hill with difficult slopes to arrive because the most important property is it impregnable. In the reconquest age the stronghold never downfall with a direct assault, finally the Castellano's army after a large siege force to the government surrender it.

Then in the 18th century, the Napoleonic army lived in it until the end of independence Spanish war. The French army before came back to France destroyed it. 

Actually the castle has been restored and has a historic museum, also have a great hotel with four stars for tourists. I like this place because I can enjoy a good views to my city.
I prepare class every day.
I try to do all the activities in class.
Furthermore, I don¡¯t have enough time to practice and do activities at home.
Furthermore, I need to speak and participate more in class.
We speak most of the time, so it is good to develop our confidence and fluency to converse.
Plane, train, and boat are the ways to travel. I think the boat is the best way to travel,, and I have three reasons for my idea. First, the boat moves across the sea and the sea is very beautiful. For instance, when we move on the sea, we can see many types of animals, such as birds, turtles, and fishes. Next, the boat is usually very big, so we can do many activities on it, such as dancing, drinking. Finally, It is the safest way to travel, because we do not have many dangers, such as crashing, falling any other kinds of danger in the sea. Therefore, I prefer the boat to travel, instead of the train or the plane. All in all, travel in the sea with a boat can be very interesting and comfortable, in addition, it is very safety. I advise you to travel by boat if you have enough money for it.
Have you ever practiced rafting? Do you know how amazing it is to do this cool sport? If you don¡ät know nothing about it, it¡äs high time to do it!
I hadn¡ät never heard about doing rafting until my best friend, Carmen, told me whether I wanted to have a whale of a time with her and I accepted it. Therefore, we went to join in a sports center which take over organizing this stunning outdoor activity.
Rafting get you to burn all your adrenaline whereas you try to get down over the river in a mini-boat.It¡äs extremely exciting!
In addition, you¡äll enjoy a breathtaking landscape around you and you¡äll also see a vast range of wildlife in both sides of the river.
Nevertheless, I would recommend you to wear appropriate clothes and to bring protection cream with you. In contrast, you could suffer some nasty cuts or, even though, being sunburst.
Let¡äs go! Do not hesitate taking up rafting! You won¡ät regret!

I live in a small village on the countryside with few people. Even if we are a country, we take care of the environment through the use of photovoltaic systems on roofs of many houses, such as the nursery school and other houses that have these systems to produce energy.
We separated paper from glass and also to plastic. The garbage picks up paper once a week, plastic two times at month and undifferentiated three times a week to all people who live in my country. My district makes clean my village, and it usually tries to make attractive with new social initiatives for the community.
All people of the world have friends, I'm not an exception. When I was 10 years old, I met my best friend. We're friends since we start to talk, but our friendship has change over the time.
When we were 12 we played in the garden with the balls and with the other boys and girls, but when we were 12 years everything changes we don't want to play in the garden because we preferred cinema or watching TV.
Because of age changing we didn't see us, but at the moment that we grew up more, we met us in the weekends, and sometimes we're upset about some problems that we had.
With the time we are more friends. Now, we sometimes discuss, but we love us because he always stays together in the good moments to take a coffee or talk about our lives, but he also stays in the bad moments, despite being friends since we were 10 years old. 
For this reason I think that friendship is so important thing in the life.

I think the opposite, I believe that public transportation has a really huge future. 
It is true that we are a lot of users that want to use the car but, and that amount is growing up; as well there are a lot of people that don't have the possibility to have a car and some use the public transportation because many reasons like the price, because it is easier to get to the place by public transportation rather than car, because the traffic, sometimes for people it is so exhausting to drive lots of hours an even sometimes the public transportation is faster. 
The population is growing up so fast, we need public transportation, is important. 
Public Transportation is convenient for some people and some people think is more convenient the car, finally we will need public transportation on the future.
		In our opinion globalization is a good thing that happen to us, allow us to interact with all the world, so we can meet the cultures, monuments, etc. It brings us a lot of opportunities to change and in some cases to get a better life in other countries like find a job with the highest salary. Although we need to change some things in the world, more than This is to change a lot of things in the Third World countries, because it is not acceptable that in the twenty-first century a person live with less than a dollar per day. 
Dear Molly, 
I'm writing of my summer job at the Cinema.
It was very beautiful, because I can see many films free, and I meet all the young people of my country.
In the morning I walk around the cinema and the most important place of my country and I talk about the films that the people can watch. They do more questions and I very funny for this.
I couldn't buy the tickets of the film's cinema,, but I could do more discount all my friends!
I hope that you are funny like me. They pay me a lot of money and I can buy a lot of dress, jeans, shoes, book and make-up.
I see the new film of Disney "Inside out" and I eat much pop corn! 
I cry a lot for this film,, but it's very important for me because I love Disney's film.
I don't lose anyone!
Hoping for your answer 

I love you
Marta 

First of all, this is a report that will explain how the village of Vancouver is handled their rubbish material.
Firstly, the city of Vancouver has a program called go green Vancouver that it will protect the environment selecting the rubbish by containers at the same time there is a collaboration from the city hall of any district that it will provide 3 containers for each house one for papers one for bottles y the last one for rubbish materials.
Secondly, there is a program with the water company to cut on spends of the water by 50 % using a recycle water treatment and recirculating to the house without dumping the waste and saving our planet.
Finally, every city hall is improving the care of the environment because there is an incentive programme from the government like if they cut the spends of every house by 50 % city halls get more money from the central government.

I strongly believe that grammar is not the most important element to speak English, if you know grammar you only know certain rules to write, but I think that speaking is most important than writing, because when you go to anyplace in the world, you have to be prepared to talk and understand whatever they say to you; in this part you may notice that if you don't know vocabulary, you wouldn't understand anything; but here is another topic, whether you understand or not, you have to notice the way that people talk to you, and try to realize what the person is trying to say.
According to your e-mail, we discovered the price should be USD 122 instead of 222.

Please be advised that the right amount on the settlement date. Awaiting your amendment as soon as possible.
 Ride bicycle is my favorite sport. It helps me healthy. It keep me positive mood. I can seem much scenery in short times. I can buy goods along the road.
 Buy a good bike is the first when you start to ride. Once or twice on a week to ride. It can avoid catch cold.
It is clear that technology has provided us with several options in communication.
Perhaps the clearest example of this is that, unlike the past, it is not necessary to buy envelopes and stamps to send the letter. Instead, people prefer to email or text to send messages.  Another way this change is evident is that social networking or applications such as Skype, FaceTime and Facebook are widely used to stay in touch with their family, friends and relatives

My favorite sport is basketball.
This sport is very easy to play. You need to play it on team. You need to have ability to play it. This sport is about you catch the ball and score. You do exercise to be strong and have ability in your legs and your hands.
I enjoy this because I like it. I love this sport. In some cases, you could have an accident, but that's not, probably. When I'm playing this sport I have a great moment and I learn more, and I will have more experience in a future.
It doesn't difficult, and you can start to play. All the people can do this sport. Basketball is recognized to people in the world. 
By Emma Aguirre Fuentes
Dear Sir,

I am writing to apply for the job advertised on your webpage.
I see myself as a perfect candidate for this position. Furthermore, I have already been on camps before.

Yours faithfully

Mary Pink
Dear Sir/Madam,

I am writing to apply for the job in summer camp advertised on February 9th on local newspaper. I have worked for last 10 year as a teacher in junior school. Now I want to utilize my summer to help children in different activity. 

I have experience of arranging different sports activity for children. I am very good at cooking as well, so I think I can be helpful in the kitchen also. Furthermore, I am confident that My profile makes me a very suitable candidate for the summer camp.

Furthermore, I look forward to hearing from you soon.

Yours sincerely

John Alder
 The members of my family are my best friends. Because we spend a lot of time together. And there is a good communication between us.
 In my opinion, every family must have a good communication. Because I think, communication is one of the most important things in our life. We use communication every time. Because people have to use many communication techniques to communicate with other people.
 However, the families that haven't a good communication haven't a good life. If we want to have a good life, we must make good communication in our families
Hi!
My name is Anton. I live in the one of the most beautiful countries - Ukraine.
When I was at school, my friends and I attended Union swimming school.
I was 30 years before.
I used to have training twice a week.
Furthermore, I liked that time a lot. My friend and I always had ice create and fun after training.
Now I'm a business analyst. I work at an office and have no ideas where are my friends.
This year I decided to star visiting the pool and swim up to three times a week.
Now, when I swim at the open pool, I am overfilled by positive emotions.
I like swimming a lot. 
Nowadays, the option of broaden the Ming traveling is very common.
In my opinion I think that it is not the only way, but it is the best way.
Apart from that you see new places, and you have fun, you also learn others cultures, historical facts, you also learn to respect others peoples and this costume.
In addition, you don't think in yours problems and the only thing that you do is have fun and do what you what to do.
Besides, you see new world and this form of lives and that helps to open your mind, see the world in other way.
In conclusion I think that it is the best way to open your mind not the only way but yes the best way. 
Many countries are truly started to concern no environment and worried about the globe warming, In schools teachers are doing their best to educate children how to take care of their schools and keep them tidy, also they train them how to plant trees in public gardens of their towns, Although government strict so many laws and taxes in the people how do not pay their taxes to the council for cleaning of the rubbish from towns and villages, in the biggest polluted city in the world people started to use bicycles and cycling instead of driving their cars to reduce the pollution of their city, also they invented different ways to plant even every little area which can be planted to keep their city clean and attractive. 
First, I disagree with that statement, because of these reasons I am about to give. Once we stop using Public transport, it is going to causes problems. For example, if we're completely relaying to use cars, it is going to increase the gasoline uses. Apparently it is going to make more pollution more global warming issue. However, using cars makes the life easier but when everyone or every house they will own at least three cars it is too much. Although the traffic jams, the accidents etc. . 

 Public transport it is really important, and it has a lot of advantages for helping humanity. In my opinion every country they should have different kind of public transport 
buses, subways, and trains. For instance San Francisco it is a great example for incredible city, the variety of choices in the public transport it is remarkable. In spite of the cost of these facilities it is going to be expensive, but it is necessary. 

In conclusion, The governments should work on that because the people need the public transport and the world for the environment, life expanses it is much cheaper than having a car. I hope to see it around the world, public trans port, something we cannot avoid or replace with another thing.

In the future, public transport will disappear. Everyone will have his own car.
Cars will be safer and speeder than now. Traveling by car will be the best suitable
way to move from place to another.
Recommend to friends what country we have to go.
I would like to recommend friends to visit Italy.
first, nowadays, wherever we go we can find Italian restaurant easily.
There are a lot of food all over the world. But I think Italian restaurant is getting famous.
Second, beautiful tourist places like a Venice.
I have been to Italy when I was 20.
It was awesome. There is no word to explain.
Venice is a city that is based on water. There are no cars, no metro in Venice.
On the other hand, it could be complicated. But nobody complaint.
I think that's why this city can maintain the safe environment.
Third, Italy is famous for fashion. It brings many fashionable people.
If you are a person who love fashion, you will enjoy going there. 
The last thing is history.
This country has a lot of history.
So it makes me exciting.
So if you want to visit any country, I'm going to recommend to Italy. 

The biggest anecdote, that I have with my friend, was our trip to Disney world. Where we could visit all the parks of Disney, like Animal Kingdom, Hollywood studios and Magic kingdom. In addition we could visit others parks, like Universal and Bush Garden. But this is not the end of our trip, we went on a voyage in a Royal Caribbean cruise, where all the food and drink was free, because it was also paid. During the voyage, we disembarked in the Bahamas and Coco Kay, which is a private island of the cruise, we went to the beach and played so many games. To sum up, this trip was the best experience we have in our lives, because we make friends, visit a new country, and we have a lot of fun.
All about me

My name is Laura. I'm thirteen years old and live in Stocks with my two families (they all don't live in the same house). I have one twin sister, one little sister and one little brother. Furthermore, I have a dog named Atlas, and he is a Berger Mennen/ Lander. He is four years old (the same age as my little brother). I love horses, and I'm practicing horse riding at Djursholms ridklubb. I'm taking care of a horse called Lady.  My grandpa lives in Spain with my step grandma,, but she is like my grandma. My step mother¡äs mom is also like my grandma. I don't like spiders and shoots.
I went to an awesome concert of points of view, and I know that I look forward to telling you how it was. But let me tell you it was a concert that the performed Leila Band and I have taken and I especially, I was the cameraman. It was an excellent night. The concert was evening began at 20:00 and came a lot of personae. We were all excited, those from Leila Band minute. Their voices have positive vibration through their musical and give you a good feeling. On the scene moves very well and know how to take pleasure to the public. I am feeling wonderful and my promise is that when going to have a special occasion to go to a concert supported by Leila Band, you will be with me. As like this in all my heart. I hope as those recounted by me in this mail, and you feel a slight vibration from the concert.
Hi Emma,
are you busy now ? I heard that you so really have many of work activities now. Yesterday I watch fast to furious at the cinema. You know that I love action film like this. During watching the film, I imagine if I be the fianc¨¦ of Adam. OMG, I can stop imagine until now. The main character is so cool, charismatic, and patient. You must watch it too, because your favorite actor also in this film. He is in secondary actor, but I really sure you will have imagined as liar as me too. Why are so many cool men in this world. Xoxo 
The latest exciting movie that I am looking forward to is "Get hard" movie starting Kevin heart and Will Ferrell.  
This is movie is based on racial humor. A white man racially profiles a black man.
Kevin's heart is in a difficult situation because his nothing at all what this man expect him to be,, but he plays the role anyway.
 The movie is already a success opening the box office with $36 million endorsement. 
I am very excited to see Kevin heart and Will Ferrell characters come together. 
They seem to have great chemistry between them. 
I think if you're a comedy fan you will be excited to see the movie and even if you're not the movie is a must-see.

Dear Sir Summer Camp,

I am writing to apply for the Summer Camp Job.

My name is Filip, and I am sure that I am the perfect person for this job. I am used to children, I have two sisters with 9 and 11 Years old, and I take care of them all the time. I am not used to cook to this number of people,, but I am a hard worker, and I am a fast learner, so I am certain that I will be in a great help for you this summer.

Furthermore, I hope that you consider my application and contact me for the job.

Best regards,
Filip
Dear Sir,

I¡¯m writing on behalf of Mrs Renata Barclay. 30th October works for Renata to meet in Berlin. I checked connection between Warsaw and Berlin, and she might be at 11.10 at Berlin OSB station. Is it possible to arrange a meeting near this station?



I think in future isn't necessary to use the public transport and why? Simple, the new generation decided to take your driving license and I saw this around me, my colleagues, my friends, my family. It¡äs just a question of time when everybody will have a car. This affirmation: travelling by car is so much more convenient say everything, for example if we think a lot of time we spent on wait bus to arrive our destiny, the traffic is a lot of things that everyone prefer buy car is more practical and fast.
Don't forget the must. In my opinion, the price of the ticket on bus is expensive. Every year the price of public transport turn it up. We can stop and do a mental arithmetic, and we can see a lot of many we spend one year. If we have a car, I believe we don't spend much money. It's just my opinion because this is my life,, so I know what I am talking about. Every month a buy my pass for use on the bus. I am part of the new generation where in future use car and the public transport are disappeared.
Hi Isabel,
How are you?
Where are you from?
I'm from Italy, I live in Varese, a beautiful town not far from Milan in Lombardia.
Varese has many attractions, between which the lake, where I like to stay.
My favorite place in the town is Esters gardens, where I go to walk with my friends during the afternoon.
Michael is a nice boy, but one day he met Julia. Julia is a pretty girl. They spent time together and were very happy. But Michael sometimes has a problem. He is proud, it's not a good way. On Saturday they fought and Michael closed the door and knew at that moment he had made a mistake.
Public transport is important for anyone. The people should walk more than before. That makes them healthy. Nowadays, many accidents happened when they were driving their car. They are going to travel around all over the world by plane.
 The young people feel happy more.

I have big family, consists of three sisters and one brother. But when comparing my family with my father's family. I don't feel that. Because he has five sisters and three brethren. When my sisters are married, they have one or two children at most. I think the Egyptian family became simpler with the passage of time 
The cocaine, it's the most dangerous addiction. Firstly, cocaine damage your senses and your mind, if you consume cocaine, you won't sleep this day. Secondly, it's so addictive, because the body need more and more, so if you consumed cocaine, you would leave because you'll an addict. Finally, the consequence of cocaine are the dead, if you sniff all the time cocaine or a lot, you die early. In conclusion, cocaine it's the most dangerous addiction, because you die early and your body it's destroyed with the cocaine.
Oh, cool! I haven't watched BH6 yet, u.u

Yeah, first time is ok. But if you want I see some work in special, feel free to show me via note or mention ^^

There is an increasing trend of personal transport so that public transport will be reduced in the future. Ultimately public transport would be negligible in the future.

There are so many reasons that could be affected to public transport system. The main one is, nowadays, people are dead busy with their day-to-day life so that they don't like to spend their valuable time for waiting on the way for the regular transport. Also public transport is experienced lots of pollution which is harmful for human being. For example, lunchtime travelling is very dangerous for pregnant women due to emission of carbon mono oxide which is effected to red blood cells and irritate to breathing system. As a result, they prefer personal transport system to prevent from such hazards. Finally public transport system is not safe as always. To illustrate, If teenage girls travel by public transport every day who will interact with society beyond the limitation. So it is a big challenge to them.



 
To whom ever it goes,
I am writing this e-mail because we want to hire your company to do the accounting of our company.
Principally, we need to have the Financial States, so we need them as fast as you can because if not we would have legal problems.
I would like to know if you can give us those services and in what time you l have them.
Also, if it is the case I would like to arrange a meeting to give you all the documents you need.
I am expecting your answer.
Sincerely, Tania Amado.


Dear friends,

Thank you for the weekend. We really enjoy it! Their new house near the beach is very nice. We enjoyed swimming in the sea, had a sunbathed, had a barbecue and saw sunset. For next time, we invite you to our Woodhouse. We hope to see you soon!

Best wishes!
The graph shows the seasonal sales of ice-cream in two places-one is from an ice-cream while the other is in an indoor public swimming pool, from 2012 to 2014.
The line which represent the indoor swimming pool remain fairly steady, from approximately 1800 to 2500,the period of every year from April to June and October to December own the highest outstanding achievement, whilst the sale is downwards overall.
However, compared to the line of indoor swimming pool, the difference of seasonal achievement of ice cream van is considerably large. Overall, the achievement of ice cream van is better than the indoor swimming pool, from about 1100 to 5500. The best season to sale the ice cream from the van is autumn, while that is one of the worst season for indoor swimming pool. The discrepancy of these two place is large. The best sale achievement of the van is 4500,5000,5500respectively.
One day many years ago in something place that a don't remember the name I woke up one morning earlier than usual then I went to the kitchen and shout the name of my mother...but no one answered, and the first thing that I imagine is that they come to the town, quickly I went out to find they... But there was no one, absolutely no one, I'm scary, I yell and scream, look and look, but I had no result 
Suddenly I felt a warm hand that touched my shoulder and very slowly turn but the only thing I saw was a shadow that was holding a knife 

I woke up and realized it had all been a bad dream 
Recently when I was on youtube I saw a movie trailer, the film appeared so good and days later my friends told me if I wanted to go them to the cinema, so I decided to go, and luckily they had decided to see the film that days before I had seen.
The film is a romantic movie, It is talking about one man, NOA, who lives in a small shore town when he felt in love with a rich girl, but like always the girl¡äs parents did not like NOA¡äs life because the girl¡äs father thinks that NOA is not enough good for their daughter.
And at the end of the summer the girl went out but next year she comes again, but this time she has boyfriend and this break NOA¡äs heart. What NOA does not knows is that she was in love with him since the first time that she saw him.
The first I should say that I like a lot of kinds of sports.
One of my favorite types of sport is swimming.
I swim from childhood. I feel enjoy while I am swimming. Swimming develop all types of muscles.
You can swim during all year in the swimming pool, sea, rivers and so on.
Advice for everyone who starts to swim is feel enjoy while you're swimming.
Thank you for your attention! 
With the rising prices for the public transport in London, commuters are choosing to use their cars more and more.
Public transport was created to release the traffic in big town centers and also to facilitate workers commute.
Nowadays, trains and buses are usually packed, and the ticket fares are very expensive.
I particularly decided to drive to do my day-to-day tasks such as, shopping, visiting friends, church and so on.

To whom may it concern:

I came upon your ad in the newspaper and I wish to apply for the job.  I¡äm a great people person and have great knowledge on computers, organizing activities for children and also I¡äm a Jr. chef.

Furthermore, I hope you can grant me the opportunity to have a meeting.

Sincerely yours.
Mario Monteagudo
What a nice poem, at least mention the name of a proficient poet too. I am also hopeful to meet the group of old friends once again to revive the wonderful and unforgettable common memories of student life. Tell me what has happened at our first meeting? If it is unspeakably for public readings, thus mention in the email. Thanks for your good wishes as well. 
 Hi, my name is Robert. My favorite sport is basketball. I really like this sport. I was 7 years old when I played first time. 
My first match was when I have been in school. Our team won this match. We were happy with this. My advice for someone who want to play this game, you don't have to be tall or fast, when you play you have to think a lot. I enjoy this game because the most important thing is team work, you have to understand each other. It's really important to be tall because you will score a point faster and better. My favorite player is Marcin Great. He is a Polish basketball player. He is really tall, hi have 202 centimeters. My story with basketball were very short. I can't give you to much advice but one thing I know, a team work, the most important thing in this game.
To begin, all is very difficult here.

First place, my country¡äs politics is bad, and people have not work. 

In second place, there are very important people, and they want to have a lot of money.

Young people want to find a good job here, but they are working in MC Donald¡äs or Burger king for a low salary.

If you want to work here, you must know languages, for example: English, French or German. 

You must be a person in charge and worker, and you be able to find a good work.

My family have a company, and if you want, you're going to work with them.

I wish as a lot of luck to you, here.

If you have problems, you can call me!!  

I wait for your call. 
 Television is an essential part in our life, we turn it on nearly every day, since it can make life more interesting. Television entertains us, it can also educate. There are two points to approve it.
 For one, the show played on television may penlight us and give us some enlightenment. Teleplay are not just for fun, it can have a deep meaning, short story tells a big deal, just like a useful book. So, why not television cannot educate us?
 For another, there are many types of programs, which can broaden our eyes, they give details of education, plus other meaningful information-rich as documentaries£¬talk show and so on. These programs are not just for killing the time, but for educating.
 Television is just like a kaleidoscope, there are various materials provided for us. To sum up, television entertains, it can also educate.
Syria has a lot of good restaurants.
The Damascus restaurant at the center of the city is quite a nice place to have a meal.
It has all kinds of food, even the really fancy ones.
You can enjoy having your breakfast there with your family because they have too many types of food.
This restaurant also has games for children which they can spend their time playing it.
It also includes a huge parking, so you can park your own car freely.
On Friday they serve special food for those who don't have enough money to pay.
It's a very nice restaurant, which I prefer the most

Invention of car has made people's lives easier. No more, they have to solely depend on public transport. Though public transport are cheaper and one could get to know many companions, increase network. But public transport has fixed schedule and on a rushing day not many can really enjoy their journey. Public transport can't help when one has to travel suddenly or to go somewhere where it doesn't pass through. Those times' car is convenient to use.Ever-increasing crowd in cities and thereby traffic problems are increasing.
The home of the future.

In present times the houses is very different, but in the future houses will be 	
perhaps the same. The future houses will be different not from architecture, but the functionality. Different people will be needed in different functions, options and functionality of the future house. This will be like in ancient times, but in the past the houses was the same all round. Progress of the technique is very fast. From: horses, steam vehicle, first petrol and gas car to future cars when the drive will be electricity.
The last film I saw was "The Enormous Island" so I am going to review it for the students film club. The film that I selected is starring by Scarlett Johansson and Brad Pitt. The film was produced in 2010 by the well-known director Stanley Kubrick.
The story tell us the story of Monica(Scarlett Johansson) and her routine living in "Creator" an enormous mysterious island located in the Pacific Ocean, the problem starts when Monica fell in love with Martin.
Martin was a solitary and quiet guy who moved to Creator to relax, but he changes when he met Monica in the principal restaurant

I work for a coffee shop in center city. One of my main responsible for preparing something by 7.30 am,, so I get up at 6 every morning and I leave home for work at 6.45 am. I finish word at about 5 pm. After going to learn English class on 3 days in a week. Another, I spent free time do Yoga or make good meat for my family. 
The public transport in the near future 
Nowadays there are many ways to public transportation such as underground, buses, etc. but is a reality that the people prefer to move by car. 
Currently traveling by car is useful than public that transport, you can move around the city and reduce enough time sometimes you can share your car with friends or family and this way of transportation will be cheaper.

Teacher, I know to travel by car is the most convenient. However, I think your mind is similar to what forebear thought, because for them, society are never going to get the transport we have nowadays.

It is difficult for us to imagine a world in which there are not cars like we are used to seeing. Nevertheless, I trust in that technologies can suffer progress in the future. Moreover, we have still a lot of things which we can and must improve like travelling security, comfort and economic sources.

On the other hand, we should know that every means of transportation can be changed by 50 years later. Maybe, we could find with flying cars or electric bikes.

For all that, I think that we should be prudent when we assess means of transportation.
According to Wordsworth, a poet is not a common man, he has a greater sensibility and knowledge. The power of imagination makes him become a teacher: he has to show men how to understand their feelings and the nature that surround them. The poet is seen as a prophet, he has to improve people¡¯s moral life and drive them to the truth. He is the only one who can produce poetry in a simple language, thanks to imagination and memory.

I live in a big city and I have the opportunity to see a lot of tourists during the year.
Sometimes I give some information about where the name of streets or where the main monuments are. I have any particular problem to help them, but I have often some doubt to suggest the place to go for a shopping.

The reason is that in my city there are a lot of shopping facilities good for tourists. An example could be to have a free entrance to the Campidoglio museum if you buy a local newspaper. Also, there are some well-known brands ready to give a special prize if you but a souvenir after 8 pm.

As you see, there are a lot of opportunities for the tourists to spend their own money in my city. You have only chosen what is the best for you.

You will not regret.
 


Hello I really want this job, because I'm a happy person who enjoy nature, travel around the word, and have a lot of friends.
I'd like to work in the team area, and shows, and share stories because I like to talk to people, and I like kids.
I can speak English and I really enjoy doing so.
My town do many efforts to care of environment, they put many pins in the streets to keep it clean also they prevent private driving at many days to keep air clean, they seed trees to absorb co2 and release o2, they build factories away from the house of population to prevent respiratory diseases which is a result of air pollution from factories, so not only my country itself but also the individuals follow a proper way to keep environment clean.
Football is my favorite sport and I enjoy it because it is an aggressive game and fun. The game starts with a ball at the center of the field and then one of the two teams kicks it. The goal is to get the ball inside the opponent's net with your foot only. 
In 1994, The Scream painting, one of the most expensive of the works, was stolen in the National Gallery of Oslo (Norway). At first, the police detective thought one of the special band was stolen the painting. Then, researchers knew that Pal Enter, an art-thief more popular in Norway, was who stolen the painting. Only he needed 50 second to steal the painting. 
When he has stolen the painting he wrote a note saying:" thank you for your good security" and when he was arrested he declares that it was very easy to steal the painting.
3 months ago, he wants 1 million dollars for the painting, but the Norway government said no. Finally, the Norway police catch the painting again in one policy investigation.
I have developed organizational and time management skills through my work with different companies. Particularly, I am highly skilled in welcoming and directing customers. About my personality, I am outgoing and enthusiastic. I also have confronting problem skill. From the previous job, I've been given the complement. Whenever there was a problem, I could realize it and could solve it rapidly. I could provide an extraordinary service with a smile, even I was under unexpected situation. With these qualifications and personality, I believe that it will prove me as an ideal candidate for 5-star Cabin Crew at Qatar Airways.










2 Attachments
I think that there is future for public transport, because there are still exist people who cannot afford to buy a car, even travelling by car is much more convenient. 

We have to consider people need to earn sufficient money to support their families and be able to buy a car.
I¡äm Sara and i¡äm 24 years old. I¡äm interested in this job because at the moment I haven¡ät got a job. I¡äm a worker person and I like children. In the work I¡äm a responsibility person, I'm never last arriving. Also, I always work with children and I have a teacher certificate.I¡äm a friendlier person and I have a good curriculum.
My experience of this job y longer. I began to work 4 years ago in a special children school. This job is great because also I learn a lot of things. I like to have sports activities and education activities. My prefers activities are outing the freeware. I like to prepare my activities a week before, then when I have to do this activity it is more fast.
I think that this job is for the children to enjoy, so I¡äm the correct person because I like playing with them.
In the terms of making banknotes, the picture below demonstrate the process of making it. There are mainly 4 steps, design, preparation, printing and inspecting. This writing will explain these different step. 

Firstly, staff and Personnel design the background color, the artwork and the security issues on the banknotes, which is also done in process of other card, such as notes for supermarket. Then in the preparation process, skilled machinists prepare of metal plates for printing. After that sheets of banknotes are printed, there are differences and specials for it, it uses special ink, and print colors on both side, images are slightly rose.

At last, inspectors of the bank manually check all printing sheets, and David them into three levels."bed sheets" were sent for disposal, where things are securely destroyed." Good quality sheets" will go with packaging and distribution, where sheets are cut, packed and dispatched.However, sheets that are "partially damages" will be inspected again and separated into good and bed sheets, and sent for further actions.
I'd like to white in this subject because it's very important topic. 
my favorite sport is football, I like it so much it means to me a lot, It means partnership, teamwork,entertainment, exercise.
The whole world get together to support their favorite teams & the boys played it in the streets together.
I enjoyed it when I watch it on TV or when I attend it in the state & support my team by my flag supported phrases.
I advise anyone dream to be one of the most famous teams that works on himself a lot & and play football a lot to be professional in this sport & show a lot of matches followed by captain supervised on him 
This issue is not clear-cut as both money and job satisfaction are important in deciding career in our life. I think that on balance, it is more important to try to get satisfaction.
First, happiness comes from inside our mind. We work eight hours a day, so if we submerge in a bloody pond for a long time could definitely turn ourselves frustrated. I would choose a job with satisfaction.
In my own case, I am working as a co-cook in a diner. Cooking has been my favorite in my life. Costumers¡¯ satisfaction brings me happiness. Although the heat in the kitchen could burn us, the smile on the customers gives the best courage.
Also, the satisfaction from the customers pushes me to work harder and be better on my job. Job satisfaction could make us to purchase perfection. The more I can perform, the much I can gain. As a result, job satisfaction is a good way to get better paid. I believe I could someday become a chef in my own restaurant and serve my customer a fabulous dish. 
On the whole, therefore, I feel that it is best to go for a career that we will enjoy if this is possible.

Dear Paul,
What's up? I'm writing top you with great news. I tell you about the concert which I was last month. It was the best concert in my life. As you know, I adore Madonna. She can make a very exciting show and surprise her fans. 
The people of my city is working to keep it clean. Purchased green bins, and it has done graffiti that says: Keep the city clean is all.
They have also a playground where children can play and moms can sit on benches and gray when grandparents to accompany their grandchildren¡äs red deck painted with some dolls that say. What is my city clean. 
I will talk about passion in a life. Passion is the best thing you have to achieve your goals. Passion is something makes you happy in your life. When you have desire to do something, something you always dream to achieve it, something is touch you inside when not only do it but also when think about. You should calm down and be away from the fast lifestyle and decide to do something or apply for a job which makes you great man, and then you will find your passion 
The Home of the Future. At the moment we have a nice house with the garden. But what will be in the future? Possible we will in a space or underground. In the future, everything can change. It can be painted with new color. It can be with the flowers. But I think that not many changes. Probably houses will be smaller or bigger. They do not look like big white ball.
Variety of negative impacts appears under rapid urbanization. Urban flood is one of them. Not only the growing impervious surfaces, but also the ¡°false¡± green infrastructure contributes to it. Mountains of studies demonstrated that green infrastructure is an economical, beautiful and effective strategy to control storm water. However, urban flood keeps raging even when the amount of green infrastructure fulfills the storm water control needs in some areas. What is the obstacle that stopped these green infrastructures from providing the ecosystem service of mitigating and eliminating urban flood?
Each of person has a favorite sport and so do i.I really like soccer because it is exciting, i can learn many things when I play it. As you know that, soccer is a sport which has many people in a group, so it requires us to unite and assistance together. most girl doesn't like this, i think that it takes us energy, we need to do exercise, reasonable diet...and so on. I hope that you will try on it someday and realize it is correct
Our Mistakes mistake made us better than before if in life we hadn't got any mistake we wouldn't succeed that's why the mistakes are very important in life and I believe our mistake improve us so
but in another way they're just one mistake, and you could not come back or arranged your mistake

This article is about how I think about the efficiency of public transport.
As I lived more than 12 years on the countryside, I was dependent on busses and trains. In the morning, I needed to get to school and in the evenings public transport helped me to get home.  I hold the opinion that a more frequent and more regular transport is needed. Spontaneous activities were impossible, as you always had to plan to advance.  I was hardly waiting for my 18th birthday.
Dear Mrs Kate Ashby,

I read your advertisement in my newspaper last week. You have asked about a server in your caf¨¦. 
I think, it¡äs a great job for me. I¡äm very talented to work with people. In my education at school, I learned to cook and to wait a table. 
Also, I can work long hours. In another job before, I worked per day for 8 hours. So I think, it¡äs no problem for me, to stay and run the whole day. 
I made one week an internship in a restaurant in my village. There I saw, how a venture like this work, and you must not to show me the whole work again. I¡äm really interested in that job. By the way, I live near to the caf¨¦, so I have a short duty stroke and come every time punctual. 

Yours sincerely 

Niklas Legatos
Dear Mrs Kate Ashby,
I am writing in response to for advertisement which I saw in "The Daily Magazine" last week. I would like to be considered to work in your caf¨¦ during weekends.

I am a twenty-year-old student, currently studying for being a chef. Furthermore, I consider myself to be a responsible and enthusiastic person.
Furthermore, I am really interested in different kinds of food and I love to cook.
Furthermore, I am some experience in this kind of job, as I worked in a restaurant for two years. Furthermore, I am used to dealing with people and their orders to eat and also, I am getting used to working long hours as I study while I am trying to get a job.
If you need any further information, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Yours fatefully,
Joana.
My town is very beautiful, and I like it very much because it is not any dirty streets in it 

The governor of my city seek to develop it, and he said it will be the capital of delta actually after 30 years ago

The people in my town deal with rubbish by healthy method, the citizens collecting the rubbish and threw it in big boxes far away in the city.

Santa will be attractive city, and it will be important tourism point in the future.
If you are looking for a movie to see, I recommend you "Nemo", it¡äs the most beautiful Disney¡äs movie. The story is about a couple of clownfish who are attacked by a shark, only the dad and one baby egg survived. The baby name was Nemo. When Nemo grows up, he goes to his first school day, there he is going to be captured by a man. The only thing they found was a pair of googles that said the direction of the man. Nemo¡äs father known a fish called Doris that wanted to help him, they cross all the ocean to go to Nemo¡äs location to save him, while Nemo tries to survive in a dentist house. They finally meet and get happy again with a lot of good friends. I think you would love it. With love, Santiago.
This question is awkward for me because I do not like sport.

When I was young I tried Badminton, Squash and Taekwondo. 

I don't do sport now,

I try to keep fit, and I walk one hour every day.






It is a fact that pollution is the one of the biggest concealment of advanced world. The reason can be attributed to increased consumerist nature and unaware about waste management. In the following paragraphs, am I going to analyze these issues in a detailed way to provide solution. 
Dear Tom
I've fully understood why it is so difficult finding which activity is more important for You. I think I would have the same perplexity.
However, sometimes we need to sacrifice something when we don't have enough time for everything. As you know I am a person who likes sport and music, but if I have to decide which of this activity are more important than I would prefer sport. I think the physical activity can give us more profit in our life. For example, if You are active every day, you can keep your health in good condition.
Sport activity also make us feel more flexible and ready to force every day. In conclusion, I think you should give up your music classes.

Regards
Miko?aj
Truly, there is no future for public transport. Nowadays, cars are more affordable than ever. Almost every single household has more than one car.
With the development of the technologies, people will use other means of transport.
Having in mind that the society is also changing, people will tend to choose their place of work, which is near their home and won't need to spend time travelling. We are witnessing a great development of the work from home these days, which will also lead to fewer people using public transport.
Three Suggestions to be Doctor 

 Do want to be doctor?. Many people around the world want to help people, so they choose to study medical. If you want to be a doctor, you should do these three things.
 First, you have to study hard every single day at the high school. When study hard at the high school, you will be 
By looking at current situation of people's lives, we can imagine the changes that can occur in the future. People are not interested in physical exercise & healthy food, instead they are very much interested in earning money.

With no physical exercise & Healthy food, people are damaging their health and family relations.Nowadays nobody has enough time to spend with family, Rather they prefer to make more money by working extra hours

If people live the same way as now, in future people will be considered as working robots instead of human beings.
When I was a junior high school student, I enjoyed playing basketball with my classmates. For some reasons, I really liked to play basketball, first, playing basketball can train my muscle and make the body healthier ; the second, my classmates and I all know how to win a game through the basketball game because the basketball game is a teamwork.

If you play the basketball and enjoy the game, you just go to the basketball gym with a basketball, trying to throw the ball into the basket again and again. Don't forget to play with your friends.
Three paradigms result from the attempt to characterizing epistemologically Spanish tourism research through the study of the AECID Conference proceedings. They are distinguished mainly by the disciplines from which they come: marketing and management, economics and geography.
Not everyone has a car, so public transport is needed for every country. Public transport is helping people to get to work on time and help to reduce pollution. Also, for low income families, they couldn't afford to buy new cars, then transposition will help them to survive.  

Public transport is also reduced the daily traffic. It helps people to keep track their schedule.
Hello I like people and the children and I like to play make fun with children, it's very cool. I'm a very happy person and very interested about cooking and all things about the kitchen it's cool my dream job is a cook 
Hi Michael,
How are you? I just want to say hello. Currently, I stand at Syntax square in Athens, and it's tremendously hot weather! The sun is literally burning! I'm going to have a meeting with other international volunteers here in an hour. I am looking forward to it as a small kid! :)
I had the pleasure to visit Hotel Sparta at Romania square on my first day in Greece. I spent last night in this hotel. I watched a Greek TV show.


Dear Dana Grey,

I get in touch with you to inform him that from November 1 different activities will be carried out in CACEIS to attract numerous tourists of different places. There will be leaflets, cartels at its disposal, in which it will be able to find museums, churches, exhibitions. Also, this year CACEIS is the gastronomic capital, therefore they will find typical menus with products of Extremaduran in its restaurants. I recommend you to visit CACEIS.
The best thing it is what stay for visiting. 
If it has some doubt, do not hesitate to contact with me.

Sheila Gim¨¦nez
Agora Manager
We can really confirm that there is no future for public transport, if so, we will have to drive a car instead of buying a ticket for public transport and go to office, city, home and so on using private transport, however we can also think that in the center has no parking car, or it is not enough for the whole private car, thereby, if we use a public transport, we can simplify our lives and spend less simply because we are able to save money and time. 
A comparison between people who like to use a public transport and private transport shows that first one can save money and time, but also they are in relax much more than people who use private transport. 
Finally, I don't think that private transport is much better than public transport. I hope that those people who wrote this article can change their thought and can likely to write a very useful article.
I like Lola because it was part of my life and of life of my mother, is my favorite sport, but I like over sports too, same I don't play Lola because I'm bad, and my friends that know, don't like of people's bad of Lola. I'm watching they're playing, they're really very good, but when play over school, they're very bad
In modern growing world, The basic needs of public are increasing day by day and their expectations on quality of life took a new dimension. When we were in our childhood, we used to deal with public transport for going one place to another because that was only a cheaper option available.

But today, Things are getting change and technology marked a significant role in our life, Automobile segment increased its vertical and having a car becomes a need from luxury. We can see nowadays, more and more people would prefer to use their own car instead of buses or taxis because they feel comfortable and mobile in it. A car can help him to go anywhere and anytime in much less time as compared to public transport. 

I believe, as soon as automobile sector develop new technology in cars, people will more keen to use their own vehicle instead or public transport.
 There are many reasons responsible for a better understanding between parents and child. The first reason is no other than generation gap. What is more, parents always consider their child best. Parents often compare child to others also plays a role in this case.
 As far as I know, how to better understanding between parent and child. According to the present situation, it is a pity that their relative influence happiness in family. Therefore, it is an important that we should cerebrate this problem.
 The sum up the above argument, we should take some measures and have positive attitude. On the one hand, we may take a communication forum, it can share everyone's cerebration. On the other hand, we should stand in other point and think their reasons. Only by talking your points with your parents can prove all the problem.Furthermore, talking with parents can provide argued with them. All in all, if you were to do this, your parents will not blame for you. 
The wellness depend on three important factors: sport, nutrition and sleep. The factor that we talk about is sport. The sport is very important for the health. The sport increase our physical performance. they are a lot of type of sports, but one of them is the most practice in the world: the football. Football is a simple sport, where the player must kick the ball in the opponent goal. In this sport, you improve principally the leg muscles but all your body move. Homever the football is so competitive. All the states in the world have an own league. The best three team in the national league can take part in Champions League (in Europe) or Asian league (in Asia) and so on. Lately a lot of child wish to be a professional player, and they practice this sport every time and everywhere to improve the technique. Homewer a lot of him can't reach this scope for a lot of reasons: no money, the height (all team require a tall player) and so on. The football is very funny, and you can play it everywhere with someone. The football is a sport that group and fun a lot of nations.
For us (Manque and Lucia) computers doesn't have to replace the humans. Because they don't have a brain and can't feel anything. Computers do things that humans couldn't, or it's very difficult, or it takes so much time.
Computers have to obey orders of humans. Computers depend on humans for their existence. And it is going to be for all the eternity. 
Humans is the best!!!!
The graph is taken from the website "Statistics AUS Deutschland". It depicts the growth of the population in "Germany". The diagram shows the development of 1998 to 2014. The graph comprises only German people and no migrants. You can see it rose sharply in 2003. In 2005 was a low, but it grew than again. 1998 you are able to see that it decreased slightly.
" The Exorcist", the film.

 "The Exorcist", is one of the most exciting and astonishing thriller that I have seen in my life.
The actor's interpretation are sublime, and they make you feel afraid all the film.
 Especial effects are amazing.
Even though is detachable the fidelity with the text of the novel.
One thing that I find interesting, is that this film is temporal; I mean that you can watch in any decade of your life, and ever seems a nowadays film.
This confirms " The Exorcist" is a great film.
Nowadays, with the development of society,many forests and lands are replaced by blocks and transport networks.
This will cause three problems to we humans and animals. First and foremost, it can make contamination to the environment, which can affect our health

Through this comparison, the author wants to mark that the pagan spring festival may look like a celebration of Christian beliefs, but it is not. On Easter time the important thing is to consecrate Christian tradition on the contrary, the pagan spring festival doesn't focus on consecration but rather on celebration

 My town takes care of the environment because the people of my town try to plan how many trees and plants they can. The people of my town try to plant plants in the center or somewhere is to smoke, so they try to keep the air at recommended levels. On the morning a lot of people go on foot to the work or to the school or ride a bike, or they take the bus. The people try to move the local factories out of country where it is less air polluted, less smoke, less cars and more forests and plants.
Travelling by is convenient, but for mass people public transport is very important and much need. No of all people could afford to make convey enc by car .car is easy and cozy also but public transport is fair is much affordable to all classes of people
public transport means mainly public bus. People used to travel long distance by public bus .it is possible to carry large number of people of different places to carry in bus. 


The coat of arms of the city of Robins is a scarlet heraldic shield, over which - green with golden beach pier for which the output is black rebelling bear holding in the left leg on the left shoulder golden ax, undertow silver starlet
I like to drive a moped because I love speed, and It's fun to go out and drive with your friends to a sea or maybe a BBQ party. I drive a Sunday KS50, it is an old moped from 1975.
Hello 

my name is Mustafa I am 23 years old, and I am Student in collage I search for job, but I don't find a job

I wish that my country become a great country and better, and I wish to married who I love her 

thank you 
 Why does culture differences sometimes cause a division of a country?
 Recently Scotland really has 'Hit the world' as some of the Scotch have tried their best for the Scotland referendum. Although I knew that there is some confliction between England and Scotland, but the vote has really shocked me. However, just as I thought, more than 50 percent of Scots voted 'no!', so Scotland didn't separate from the United Kingdom.
Public transport is here to stay. - This goes without saying cars are much more convenient than late trains, but I cannot agree with the overall statement,, although I do abhor using public transport. I have been travelling with both for years, and I reckon each and every one ends up needing public transport one day or another.

I would be a tad oblivious thinking vehicle ownership is granted beforehand when younger. As a grown-up now, I know full well how more affordable public transport is, albeit less than before.
Dear Juan, we moved to London for the holidays in December, to a huge and beautiful house with a big garden, garage and a tennis pitch. In front lives the Richard¡äs family.
Richard's parents are a good neighbors. They are doctors in a serious hospital. The likes go out with friends and go to a party, Richard has got a tortoise call "Deny".
In this area there are a low of clothes shops and supermarkets, but here aren¡ät sports shops.
The school is near and it isn¡ät necessary to take a bus.
I¡äm so happy with these holidays, I hope to know good people and visit beautiful places.

Love, see you soon.
The rapid advancing information technology and the development of Internet networks enable the evolution of banking activities at a comprehensive level. The connectivity derived from Internet provides the invaluable business tool for online banking. It influenced the consumers' behavior on banking services. The consumers from traditional branch banking moving towards using electronic delivery channels like personal computer (PC) and mobile phones is the most fundamental changes.  Lu, J., You, C.S., Liu, C.and Lao, J.E. (2003)
Compared with the past when we use horse for transportation. Did the people have the same opinion that there is no future for transport, and we only can use horse?
The reason for why we have such improvement is that the technology and innovation have changed our life. Cars replaced the horse, and even plane have replaced the cars for long distance transportation. 
So I think there will be a future for public transportation, and this may because of the updated technologies.  
My favorite sport is a football, soccer because it is the most popular on the work. After school, my friends and I go to a park to play soccer, we play for two hours.
 
Hello Maria,

thanks a lot for your response. 

Here some information about us. We are a married couple, both 32 years old, live at the moment in Films in Canton Graub¨¹nden. I am originally from Ukraine, was living from 2009 till last year in Germany and Juan is from Colombia, since 3 years in Switzerland. We're moving to Z¨¹rich because of my husbands' job in the new opening hotel Kirchgasse, right in the corner from the apartment. And I will start studying in the Belvoirpark hotel school, so we'll want to rent the apartment for at least 3 years or even longer. 

We're looking for a new nice home, and so we are truly interested to keep your place tide and take care about it as it were our own. If you'd like, we could get the recommendations from our previous landlords.

I hope this information is enough for the beginning, and we can have the possibility to meet you and introduce ourselves in person. This week we are flexible to come over from Thursday to Saturday, and the days before only in the evening. 

Looking forward to hearing from you and wish you a nice day.

Kind regards 

Kate and Juan 
If I told you that, Travelling by car or by bus, which one you will pick. A lot of people nowadays will take their own car, it's easier and flexible. But why public transport have no future to stand and keep going?, that's because of the people that changing their mind, they start like having their own way to travel, Privacy also an important reason, people need to have a private means of transportation. That's why there is no future for public transport 
I promised to lean on math the whole week.
But every time, I get rubber.
I know I have to lean, but to start leaning isn't easy.
I don't want to study,, but there is no way out.
Furthermore, I have to.
My favorite sport is football, the principal reason why I like it is that when I was younger, I played with my friends, and we got together to play every day.
I remember those years and would like that my children will practice it when they will be oldest, an interesting sport.
My favorite team in Spain is Real Madrid, the best team. If I were football player, I would like played in this team, but I think that it is very difficult because, only the best players gets it.
Nowadays, I like others sports to practice: tennis, Basketball, ... but I prefer playing football with my mates on weekends, and then we drink some beers in the pub to celebrate the victory or the defeat. These moments are very special, and I hope to be able to enjoy for many years.
Finally, I recommend this sport for the child in order to get a healthy life, get together with their friends and forget for much time alcohol and drugs.
I love sports and I believe to practice it is the best to get a good life.
I am here to write about a composition about public transportation in Somalia, specially the capital city Mogadishu where there is a little public transport comparing to our neighboring countries. There is a scarcity of public transport and there is one type and model which Van, as well as very distracted roads which may cause collateral damage.

Sometimes passengers and drivers face risks and road blocks which usually happen when the Somali government leaders are travelling across the city and even abroad.

So having good infrastructure helps a lot and constant peace and the people of Somalia will not suffer anymore.

Thanks.



Hello friends, you¡äre welcome to Puerto, here we have a lot of shops. What would you like to buy? We have a commercial center, very nice. If you want, you can buy a lot of things there.
1.	Is it possible to go without a compression machine? Will we can to compress ducts manually?
2.	I¡¯ve noticed that the machine cost is higher than it's been anteriorly. Please, send to us actual strip material price.
3.	If we want to produce Spiro ducts and other articles in the future. Do we have to buy one new special machine?

As as as public transport you can save fuel as well as pollution, but it takes more time to reach the destination. 
while if you have your own conveyance you can save time and moreover it is safe. The most important thing is there would be huge traffic on the roads and traffic movement will be very slow.  

But keeping in view of environment we should prefer to use public transport 
USA SUMMER CAMPS VACANT

Dear all

I am writing you because I am interested in the job of summer camps. My name is Andreas Costa Souza, I am a student of Digital Media in Techno logic of Monterrey. I like going to camp because I love nature and I delight to know new people around the world. I consider a friendly and cheerful person because I always have a smile in my face. Every time I have a lot of energy. I have experience working with children, my experience is about to years in summer camps around the world. I had been working in sport events like organizer. Currently, I am working in the racing TEC of 5k and 10k on Cuernavaca, Morelos. I do not have experience working in the kitchen. However, I know to cook every kind of food.

I hope a response and feel free to contact me.

Yours Sincerely,
Andreas Costa
m98fhdf.fmn34@hotmail.com
123 456 7890.
I live in Bhubaneswar with my family. About fifty thousand people live in the city. It is a clean and environmentally friendly city. The city has its own public transportation system, waste management system. People live here take care of city environment, so the city became clean and green place. The city contain about thirty public parks. The parks are full of greenery; these parks also used as playground for children. Trees in the parts are not sufficient as per requirement of our city. Ten year before, local governing body of the city decide to plant more tree, and it asked advice from the citizens of the city about the proposal. Everybody got interested in the project. We planted trees near the side of highway, unused lands, and outside the city. Now these trees are grownup. It gives shades, shelter to animals, and purify air. The trees are also stop soil erosion in rainy season.
Our city have a well-equipped waste management system. Each house in the city have two verity of trash can to keep recyclable and non-recyclable items separately. In Morning, waste collection truck came, and it take these waste. These waste materials are processed with environmentally friendly. 
In my opinion I do not agree with what journalists do, or to me if I were a movie star, a famous man who has done many performances I do not like every hour of the day to be pursued by journalists.
 In addition, everyone wants to have a moment of privacy and because journalists paparazzi can not have a moment to relax, tutoring for children or dependent on what else you want to do it, and you can not because journalists.
 And another reason why I have so right in what I had to say in the ranks above, you feel if you were in game then people are always these people and destroy families because they declare false Intrigue sometimes.
 Sometimes abuse the right to be a journalist with all sorts of questions with no response or have a partial response to these famous people can say that journalists have a stressful job for some people.
 And finally I would like to say yes are against these people, or still might change their style and everything would be ok!
 
 My fianc¨¦ is 28 years old. He is young and handsome. He has a short light brown her and black Eyes. He has a light beard.  MOLASSES is a tall guy about 175 c.m and his Weight is 71 k.g and has a wight skin . He loves going to the beach, and he loves swimming. He is a casual (clothes) wearing such Shirt and jeans which mostly blue, Gray and Black. If you see him, you notice how he is an elegant.

 MOLASSES is nice and lovely fianc¨¦ he loves his job as he is Patient will dong has top .he is a hard worker he has amazing laughs 
. When you started talk with him, you will be inspired by his knowledge and his way of talk he has the talent to Convinces 
thought. He is an orderly and clean man. He is the tip of person you can't forget easy.

My family is my best friend to me.
I have fathered, mother and three sisters.
My parents are on pains, my first sister is 37 years old, she is married, and she has 2 children Zyad and Yasmin, her name is man.
My second sister is 34 years old, she is single, and she works as a customer service agent, her name is Shymaa.
My third sister is 29 years old, she is married, and she has 2 children Jana and Salah, her name is Asmara.
Asmara is the best friend to me in my family.
I always feel happy that God has granted me a good number of family members who always care of me. Even though I always thought that doing any task with family is baseless but after my marriage I understood an importance of family who always want to make happy. I have a little toddler with whom I love to share my feelings, he always gives me a nice hug after I return from the office. I feel proud to hug with him with full of my emotions and I forget all the stress developed in the office hours. 

In the past, I do not care so much in respect of having good amount of stock, I always inquired about availability and love to get anything new for my sweet home. I do not know why this kind of feeling arose, but whatever it is, I enjoy my days with family members. 
Hello Pierre,
I would like to thank you for your help me. You send me a lot of information, but the most important was about the culture. My teacher said that I have had a fantastic project. I'm very happy. 
Kisses,
Maria
My town is called As suit. The People here, have no knowledge about how to use their rubbish. People throw their rubbish everywhere. On the other hand, we haven't any kind of law, that can limit that action; I mean rubbish throwing. So if we're still doing nothing new, our country will still unattractive. 
Humans prefer luxurious life. Public transport is a bit uncomfortable. With the coming of cars, people are using public transport rarely. Everyone prefers to have his/her own car. So the future of public transport is very dark. This is an alarming issue that needs to be addressed at earliest. Because if everyone uses his/her car, pollution will increase and that will eventually affect every living being.
The "Casey Alvaro restaurant" is a restaurant situated in Valencia, a small city in the north of Portugal. There we can eat a lot of types of dishes,, but the most popular dishes are "costly" and "Dachau Na brass". The restaurant won a Michelin star in 2013.
The restaurant is very well situated with a big parking and a beautiful landscape.
As you enter the place you are welcomed by magnificent setting, a lot of photographs of restaurant¡äs story, and you have a wonderful view of the kitchen where you can see the chefs working, so you can see the quality of the food.
The chefs take great care in selection of the best quality ingredients and the service is great. 
The clients don¡ät have to wait a long time until the dish is done while clients are waiting they always give bread and wine
The price of the food is expensive but nothing pays a good meal.
In the end of the meal, you have to sign a book to recall in the future.
Dear USA SUMMER CAMPS,
I am interested in working at your summer camp program. My name is Abel Ferreira, and I am 14 years old. I speak English and I really like to work with kids and this is my dream job. 
I am the suitable person for the job because I like to care of kids and I have the capability of being empathic with other people.
I have good abilities; such as, organizing the activities and help the kids to keep their rooms tidy. 
I will wait for your answer, 
Abel Ferreira

The charts below give the information about the most important reasons for study among students of different sage groups also the amount of support they received from employers. 

The first chart is the reasons for study according to age of student. For career has 80% under 26 years old students are taken it, for the age over 49 years old only has 20%people are taken; but if you counter interest, it is total different; for under 26 years old have only 10%; but for over 49 years old it has 70%. However, for 40-49 years old it is both 40% for career and interest. 

The other chart is about employer support, under 26 years old is the most highest because it almost has 70%, the scent highest is age 26-29 years old; it has 50% of people are taken; nil the lower is 35% age of group are 30-39 years old.
The best places for young people to visit in Sweden is Stockholm city and few more places that can be exiting. In Stockholm, you can do whatever you want,there are places to enjoy for everyone. You can visit old city and watch old buildings and castle, you can watch the beautiful view from bridges over the water. Young people may like to take a walk in king garden, there is Sakura trees. If you like night-life you can go to some bars and nightclubs that are open till morning. But there are two places that I meant in the beginning, its a big zoo called Kolmorden and biggest aqua park in Scandinavia that called Rush.
Dear headteacher,

As a student at a local school, i would like to say that to delete the field trips 
isn't good for students.
First, to get students outgoing from the classroom students take a break of the school routine.
Furthermore, going on the field trips give students a change to experiment thinks for themselves.
In addition, field trips are an important part of our schools activities.
This is why I believe that the field trips are good for kids.


 From 
                                                                       Spiro in Althea.
Hi Adam, 
   Nice to write to You! Unfortunately, I saw You last time many days ago. Do You know I came back from Budapest?. You know I was there on the trip.
 As You can imagine, I visited a lot of monuments and cathedrals which I could see and know something new about them. As I discovered, the river Danube is the loveliest of others. It's even the longest river I whenever saw.
 And You? How was your trip? Was it as good as mine? Write to me about what were you doing there.
Best wishes, Julia
My name is Maria. I am from Spain. I live in Arizona, a small town near to Zaragoza.
Furthermore, I am an architect since 2003. When I was studying, I lived in San Sebasti¨¢n. 
San Sebasti¨¢n is a Town near the sea. When I was eighteen years old, I went out of my home.
I lived in a residence for two years. After, I was living in a flat. My flat matter is my best friend today. She is Azucena and nowadays, she lives in Toulouse.
My husband, and me, often go to Toulouse to visit Azucena.
If Azucena does not live there, We would not know Toulouse.
I like Toulouse very much. It is an old city, with red buildings. 
Toulouse buildings are built with bricks, red bricks.
The most important street in Toulouse is Boulevard Chass¨¦, and it is near to the river. The river is in Toulouse is Girona.


Hello Alison.
How are you doing?.
Susan told me that you need to show a couple of things before your visit to Spain.
We have customs as siesta, Demand Santa and San Ermines in Pamplona. Spanish people love spending time with their family and friends. We are sociable and welcoming people.
We usually eat housemate food.It¡äs what we call Mediterranean diet.It¡äs includes vegetables, meat, fish and olive oil.
In our daily life, we wake up earlier in the morning. We take a shower, we have breakfast, and we go to work.
Please, drop me a line as soon as you can.
Best wishes.
Isabel
Peter looked at his watch and knew that he had to do something immediately. At that moment, he knew he's decision was going to affect his whole life. He thought how could he solve his problem, and finally he decided to break out. When he was escaping from the prison, he bumps on an old friend called Charlie. Charlie was the only men that could help him scale.
Why I enjoy my favorite sport?
So I think my favorite sport is gone walking through the nature. I love it, when the temperature is a little cold, but not too much. I can relax, when I walk alone and hear the noise of the birds in the trees. Furthermore, I live in a little village near a forest, so I can go everyday walking through it. There are so many animals and when you are quite, you can see a deer or a fox. And sometimes I take my camera with me, because I love photography and there are so many great motifs.
Rest...Durant.

There¡¯s nothing like eating! We all agree on that, eating food is one of the best moments on our day, it¡äs like word stops for a few minutes in which you are just enjoying your food. But there¡¯s a different between eating a good meal, and eating by the way. In this opportunity, i¡äm going to talk about different cool restaurants we could choose at the moment of going out as the close of classes.